Title: Coupled Orbital and Interior Evolution of Sub-Neptunes

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.20611v1

Published Time: Fri, 18 Sep 2026 01:32:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
> Draft version September 18, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

Coupled Orbital and Interior Evolution of Sub-Neptunes 

Ritika Sethi, 1, 2 Sarah Millholland, 1, 2 and Tim Hallatt 1, 2 

> 1Department of Physics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
> 2MIT Kavli Institute for Astrophysics and Space Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA

ABSTRACT Recent observations have yielded the first measurements of young exoplanet demographics. Close-in sub-Neptune occurrence rates appear to rise from young (10 − 100 Myr) to intermediate (100 Myr −

1 Gyr) ages and then decline sharply in the old ( ≳ 1 Gyr) Kepler field population. In this paper, we test whether these observations can be explained by the effects of planetary cooling, atmospheric mass loss, and tidal orbital migration, which we model through a fully coupled evolution framework. The orbital evolution is assumed to operate exclusively through high-eccentricity migration, in effort to estimate the maximum possible contribution from this migration channel. In reality, only a subset of planetary systems are expected to undergo HEM. We find that high-eccentricity migration rapidly populates the close-in sub-Neptune bin, producing a sharp rise in occurrence within the first ∼ 15 Myr. After this early phase, the occurrence evolves only weakly. While the modeled young to intermediate-age evolution is broadly consistent with the observed trend within the uncertainty limits, it does not support the idea of a sustained young-to-intermediate rise driven by tidal migration. It also fails to reproduce the sharp decline in occurrence seen from intermediate to old ages, motivating additional physics or formation channels to be included in future models. 

1. INTRODUCTION Close-in small planets with sizes between Earth and Neptune are the most common planets revealed by Ke-pler , K2, and TESS (e.g., A. W. Howard et al. 2012; F. Fressin et al. 2013; E. A. Petigura et al. 2013). This pop-ulation is separated into super-Earths and sub-Neptunes by the observed radius valley, a scarcity of planets near 

∼ 1.5–2 R⊕ (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2013, 2017; B. J. Ful-ton et al. 2017; V. Van Eylen et al. 2018). The valley is commonly thought to reflect a transition between plan-ets that retain substantial primordial H/He envelopes and appear as sub-Neptunes and smaller planets with little or no H/He envelope, which may either be stripped cores (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; S. Ginzburg et al. 2018; A. Gupta & H. E. Schlichting 2019) or planets that formed with only thin atmospheres (M. Ogihara et al. 2015; A. Izidoro et al. 2017; E. J. Lee & N. J. Connors 2021). Although close-in planet demographic features are well established for the mature Kepler field popula-tion, tracing how they emerge with age remains observa-tionally challenging, especially for small planets around young stars exhibiting high spot coverage and frequent flares (E. E. Mamajek & L. A. Hillenbrand 2008; M. P. Battley et al. 2020; A. D. Feinstein et al. 2020). Recent observational progress, however, is making it possible to study the age evolution of close-in sub-Neptunes at a population level. Such measurements provide a way to directly observe the physical processes responsible for sculpting the mature population. Occurrence rates of close-in sub-Neptunes have been measured for young and intermediate age stars using TESS and K2 (R. B. Fernandes et al. 2023; J. L. Christiansen et al. 2023; S. Vach et al. 2024; R. B. Fernandes et al. 2025). In particular, R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) studied a sample of FGK stars divided into young (10–100 Myr), intermediate (100 Myr–1 Gyr), and old ( ≳ 1 Gyr) ages, and measured the occurrence rates of close-in sub-Neptunes across these age ranges. They defined close-in sub-Neptunes as planets with orbital periods Porb < 12 days and radii 1 .8 R⊕ < R p < 10 R⊕. For consistency with their work, we adopt the same definition through-out this paper. We also define close-in super-Earths as planets with Porb < 12 days and 1 R⊕ < R p < 1.8 R⊕.Hereafter, we refer to these close-in planets simply as sub-Neptunes and super-Earths unless stated otherwise. R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) found that the sub-Neptune occurrence rate increases from young to inter-mediate ages (but is flat within 2 σ uncertainties) and then declines significantly toward the old ages repre-sented by the Kepler field population. They hypoth-esized that the early rise, if present, could be driven by tidal migration, while the later decline could reflect arXiv:2609.20611v1 [astro-ph.EP] 17 Sep 2026 2 Sethi et. al. 

atmospheric mass-loss removing planets from the sub-Neptune radius range. In this paper, we aim to test the hypotheses of R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) by modeling three key physical processes that could drive the age evolution of small planet occurrence rates. (1) Thermal cooling causes young planets that form with high internal entropy and inflated radii to contract as they age (E. D. Lopez et al. 2012; E. D. Lopez & J. J. Fortney 2014; T. Hallatt & S. Millholland 2026a). This radius evolution can move planets into or out of the sub-Neptune bin even at fixed mass. (2) Atmospheric mass loss erodes irradiated plan-ets, reducing their radii and in some cases transform-ing sub-Neptunes into super-Earths (e.g., J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2013; E. D. Lopez & J. J. Fortney 2013; J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017), thereby decreasing the occur-rence rate within the sub-Neptune bin. (3) Tidal mi-gration can deliver planets into the close-in bin. In particular, planets excited to high eccentricities through dynamical processes can undergo tidal dissipation and circularize at short orbital periods in a process known as high-eccentricity migration (HEM) (P. Hut 1980; A. Castro-Gonz´ alez et al. 2026). Although these processes have often been studied sep-arately, their combined effect on population-level occur-rence rates remains less well explored. Moreover, they are intrinsically coupled. The planetary radius, set by thermal cooling and atmospheric mass loss, affects tidal dissipation rates. Tidal migration changes the orbital separation and incident stellar flux, which regulate mass loss and thermal evolution. Atmospheric loss changes the envelope mass fraction and radius, feeding back onto both cooling and tidal evolution. A coupled treatment is therefore needed to accurately predict how planets enter and leave the sub-Neptune bin over time. Recent studies have highlighted the importance of coupled orbital and interior evolution (N. Miller et al. 2009; H. Yu & F. Dai 2024; T. Lu et al. 2025; R. Sethi & S. C. Millholland 2025; T. Hallatt & S. Millholland 2026a,b; H. Im et al. 2026; C. Petrovich & H. G. Bhaskar 2026; G. C. Weldon et al. 2026). Building on these ef-forts, we developed a unified framework called the “cou-pled evolution model” that self-consistently combines all three ingredients described above– interior structure evolution, atmospheric mass-loss, and tidal migration. To our knowledge, these ingredients have not previously been combined in a single framework to conduct a pop-ulation level study. Our focus is to test the hypotheses of R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) that atmospheric mass loss and tidal migra-tion drive the evolution of sub-Neptune occurrence rates over time. HEM provides a compelling mechanism for bringing planets onto short-period orbits over timescales up to Gyrs. Recent work has shown that HEM can reproduce key demographic features, including the hot Neptune desert boundary and the newly identified “Nep-tunian ridge” (A. Castro-Gonz´ alez et al. 2024, 2026; J. J. Zanazzi et al. 2026). Moreover, several close-in Nep-tunes exhibit residual eccentricities and large spin-orbit misalignments, including nearly polar orbits, suggestive of past dynamical excitation and tidal migration (e.g., S. H. Albrecht et al. 2021; V. Bourrier et al. 2023; E. Knudstrup et al. 2024; H. Yu & F. Dai 2024; T. Lu et al. 2025; G. C. Weldon et al. 2026). Further support-ing this picture, R. Sethi & S. C. Millholland (2025) found stronger tidally induced radius inflation among misaligned Neptune-sized planets than aligned ones. To-gether, these results motivate HEM as a potentially im-portant formation pathway for close-in Neptunes. Thus, while other channels such as in-situ formation or disk-driven migration must also populate the close-in small-planet populations (e.g., E. Chiang & G. Laughlin 2013; A. Izidoro et al. 2021), we isolate HEM and ask what maximum contribution this formation channel can make to the age-dependent occurrence-rate evolution of close-in small planets. Because we intentionally select systems undergoing efficient HEM, our calculation pro-vides an upper-limit estimate of the HEM contribution. This framing allows us to assess whether HEM can re-produce the observed age-dependent trends or whether modeling additional physics or formation channels may be required for understanding the current observations. The paper is organized as follows. In § 2, we de-scribe the model including thermal evolution, atmo-spheric mass loss, and orbital evolution. In § 3, we describe the construction of the synthetic planet popula-tion and the coupled evolution framework used to evolve this population. In § 4, we present the main results and compare the model predictions with observations. In § 5, we discuss occurrence-rate predictions for young super-Earths, the role of tidally induced radius inflation, and model caveats. We summarize our conclusions in § 6.  

> 2.

MODEL Here we introduce the physical ingredients of our cou-pled evolution model. We first present the interior struc-ture model, which determines how planetary radii evolve via thermal cooling in § 2.1. We then describe the pho-toevaporative mass-loss model in § 2.2, which governs atmospheric escape. Finally, we outline the orbital evo-lution model in § 2.3. We introduce these processes sep-arately before later coupling them together. Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 3                 

> Table 1. Parameters varied in planet structure calculations. Parameter Value Units
> Mcore [2 ,20] M⊕
> Xatm [10 −4,1] ... Teq {50 ,288 ,912 ,1600 ,2500 }K
> S[4 .9−11] kB/m H

2.1. Interior Structure and Thermal Evolution 

We employ the method of T. Hallatt & S. Millhol-land (2026a) to model the planetary interior structure and thermal evolution. Planets are assumed to consist of rocky, Earth-like cores surrounded by a H/He enve-lope with solar metallicity. Details of the microphysics employed in the structure models, (e.g. the equation of state and opacities) can be found in T. Hallatt & S. Millholland (2026a). We pre-compute a large grid of planet structures in thermal and mechanical equilibrium across four axes: core mass ( Mcore ), atmospheric mass fraction (Xatm ≡ Matm /M core ), equilibrium temperature ( Teq ), and specific entropy ( S) of the planet’s innermost con-vective zone (we do not account for non-convective in-teriors; e.g. S. Markham et al. 2022). Details of our structure grid boundaries are summarized in Table 1. We note that the precise maxima and minima in our en-tropy axis depends on the other parameters (e.g. a low mass planet cannot retain an atmosphere with entropy 

S∼11, while a massive planet can); the bounds recorded in Table 1 are approximate. At each point in this four-dimensional grid, corre-sponding to a particular choice of ( Mcore , X atm , T eq , S ), the structure model provides the planet’s radius, Rp,the cooling (outgoing) luminosity, L, set by conditions at the radiative convective boundary, and the thermal inertia term, R 

> conv

T dm . The specific entropy evolves according to 

dS dt = −L

R 

> conv

T dm , (1) where dm is a differential mass element and the integral is taken over the convective portion of the envelope. The denominator represents the thermal inertia of the con-vective region and sets how rapidly the planet cools for a given luminosity. Thus, as the planet radiates energy, its interior entropy in the convective zone decreases and its radius contracts (“following the adiabats”; e.g. P. Arras & L. Bildsten 2006). We note that extra heating, e.g. tidal heating is not included here. We discuss tidally induced radius inflation later in § B. We construct an interpolation to the grid using a lo-cal linear k-nearest-neighbor (kNN) method. A KD-tree is used to identify the k = 8000 nearest neighboring grid points (J. H. Friedman et al. 1977), and a distance-weighted local linear model is then fit to estimate L,R 

> conv

T dm , Rp (W. S. Cleveland & S. J. Devlin 1988). Compared to direct high-dimensional interpolation, this scheme is faster for the repeated grid queries that will be required, does not require a strictly rectangular grid, and remains stable near gaps or irregular boundaries introduced by removing non-convective structures. Be-cause the estimate is based on a local regression rather than a strict cell-based interpolant, it also permits mod-est extrapolation near the grid boundaries, which we use for small excursions outside the tabulated domain. In our coupled evolution framework, the entropy evolution supplies the planet’s time-dependent radius, 

Rp(S(t)). At each timestep, we use the planet’s instan-taneous properties to interpolate the precomputed struc-ture grid and obtain L and R 

> conv

T dm , which determine 

dS/dt using Eq. 1. We then update the entropy and use the new value of S, together with Mcore , X atm , T eq , to in-terpolate the grid and retrieve the corresponding radius, 

Rp(t). Thus, by evolving S(t), we obtain Rp(t), which in turn affects both the atmospheric mass-loss rate and the dynamical evolution of the planet as described in 

§2.2 & §2.3. 2.2. Atmospheric Mass Loss 

Mass loss is assumed to occur via photoevapora-tion, wherein high-energy X-ray and extreme ultraviolet (EUV) photons from the host star heat the planet’s up-per atmosphere, increasing the thermal energy of the gas and enabling it to escape the planet’s gravitational potential (H. Lammer et al. 2003; J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017). We track the atmospheric mass fraction over time with (J. G. Rogers & J. E. Owen 2021), 

dX atm 

dt = − Xatm 

τ ˙X

, (2) where τ ˙X is the characteristic atmospheric mass-loss timescale, τ ˙X = Xatm / ˙Xatm = Matm / ˙Matm . ˙Matm is the atmospheric mass-loss rate due to photoevaporation. We consider a planet to be completely stripped once the 

Xatm value drops below 10 −4, at which point its transit radius is effectively indistinguishable from that of a bare core. For simplicity, we estimate ˙Matm using the energy-limited approximation, which assumes that a fixed frac-tion of the incident stellar XUV flux is converted into work required to unbind atmospheric gas and is given by (A. J. Watson et al. 1981; I. Baraffe et al. 2004; N. V. 4 Sethi et. al. 

Erkaev et al. 2007), ˙Matm = η R3

> p

LXUV 

4a2GM p

, (3) where G is the gravitational constant, LXUV is the high-energy luminosity of the host star, Mp is the planet’s mass, and a is the semi-major axis. The parameter η is the mass-loss efficiency, which we quantify by adopting a physically motivated scaling based on hydrodynamic simulations (J. E. Owen & A. P. Jackson 2012). Specif-ically, we parameterize η as a function of the planetary escape velocity, vesc , as (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; J. E. Owen 2019) 

η = η0

 vesc 

25kms −1

−αη

, (4) where η0 is a normalization constant and αη is a power-law index. We adopt η0 = 0 .17, motivated by hydrody-namic simulations (J. E. Owen & A. P. Jackson 2012; V. I. Shematovich et al. 2014, see also Y. Wu 2019), and 

αη = 0 .5 based on J. G. Rogers & J. E. Owen (2021). In the standard formulation, a tidal correction factor Ktide 

is included to account for the reduction in the gravita-tional potential barrier due to tidal terms (e.g., N. V. Erkaev et al. 2007). Here, we neglect this correction for simplicity, effectively assuming Ktide = 1. Observational (M. G¨ udel et al. 1997; I. Ribas et al. 2005; N. J. Wright et al. 2011; A. P. Jackson et al. 2012; K. Namekata et al. 2023) and theoretical studies (L. Tu et al. 2015; C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021) have shown that the ratio LXUV /L bol , where Lbol is the total stellar (bolometric) luminosity, remains in a saturated regime for young stars and declines quickly as the star spins down. Motivated by this, we model the temporal evolu-tion of the stellar high-energy luminosity as (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017), 

LXUV (t) = 



Lsat , t < t sat 

Lsat 

 ttsat 

−(1+ α0)

, t ≥ tsat 

(5) where α0 = 0 .5 and tsat ∼ 100 Myr. The saturation luminosity is given by 

Lsat ≃ 10 −3.5L⊙

 M⋆

M⊙



, (6) where M⋆ is the mass of the host star. For planets on eccentric orbits, the instantaneous mass-loss rate varies along the orbit due to the changing stellar irradiation. To account for this, we approximate the orbit-averaged mass-loss rate as (D. M. Williams & D. Pollard 2002; E. Bolmont et al. 2016), 

⟨ ˙Matm ⟩ = ˙Matm 

√1 − e2 , (7) where e is the orbital eccentricity. This scaling cap-tures the enhancement in the orbit-averaged XUV flux received by the planet and is used when coupling atmo-spheric escape to the orbital evolution. 2.3. Orbital Evolution 

Our goal is to test the hypothesis from R. B. Fer-nandes et al. (2025) that HEM drives an increase in the sub-Neptune occurrence rate from young to inter-mediate ages. We approach this by isolating HEM and quantifying its maximum possible contribution. Plan-ets in our synthetic population are excited onto highly eccentric orbits capable of undergoing HEM. We empha-size that this is intentionally constructed to represent an efficient HEM limit. In reality, only a fraction of planets are expected to actually undergo HEM. The results in 

§4 should therefore be interpreted as an estimate of the maximum contribution that HEM channel can make to the age evolution of the close-in small-planet population, rather than as a prediction of the absolute occurrence rates. HEM can be generated by several mechanisms, includ-ing planet–planet scattering (F. Marzari & S. J. Wei-denschilling 2002; S. Chatterjee et al. 2008; C. Beaug´ e& D. Nesvorn´ y 2012) and secular perturbations from an outer companion. Here, we focus on von Zeipel–Lidov– Kozai (ZLK) oscillations, which operate in hierarchical three-body systems with large mutual inclinations and can drive coupled oscillations of eccentricity and incli-nation (H. von Zeipel 1910; M. L. Lidov 1962; Y. Kozai 1962). We model the orbital evolution in two stages. First, planets undergo efficient ZLK oscillations, which are ultimately quenched by short-range forces (SRFs) in-cluding tides and general relativity, leaving the planet on a highly eccentric orbit immediately post-ZLK (M. Hol-man et al. 1997; M. C. Miller & D. P. Hamilton 2002; Y. Wu & N. Murray 2003). After this point, the planet de-couples from the outer perturber and continues migrat-ing while conserving angular momentum (P. Hut 1981). We discuss these two phases below. 2.3.1. ZLK Oscillations 

Here we briefly summarize the aspects of ZLK dy-namics relevant for our analysis (see S. Naoz 2016 for a review). We assume the existence of an outer perturber (hereafter body c), creating a hierarchical three-body system. The secular hierarchical approximation is valid if the system satisfies the empirical dynamical stability Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 510 2 10 1 10 0

# ab [AU] 

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> eb

ZLK suppressed ZLK active  

> GR Tides GR+Tides Pure ZLK constant L

Figure 1. Maximum eccentricity reached during ZLK ex-citation as a function of the inner planet’s semi-major axis for an example system. The purple curve shows the maxi-mum eccentricity reached in the absence of SRFs. The blue and orange curves show the SRF-limited maximum eccentric-ity when only GR precession or tidal precession is included, respectively. The pink curve includes both GR and tidal precession and defines the SRF-limited post-quenching ec-centricity. Regions to the left of these curves are effectively ZLK-suppressed and the subsequent tidal migration proceeds approximately along a constant-angular-momentum track, shown by the gray dashed curves. 

criterion given by R. A. Mardling & S. J. Aarseth (2001) 

ac

ab

> 2.8



1 + Mc

M⋆ + Mp

2/5

(1 + ec)2/5 (1 − ec)−6/5

×



1 − 0.3

 ψbc 

180 ◦

 

,

(8) where Mc is the mass of body c, ac and ab are the semi-major axes of body c and the planet, respectively, ec

is eccentricity of body c, and ψbc is the mutual inclina-tion between the inner and outer orbits. When ψbc lies within a critical range (39 .2◦ ≤ ψbc ≤ 140 .8◦ for the classic quadrupolar, inner test-particle case), the inner orbit undergoes oscillations in eccentricity and inclina-tion (E. B. Ford et al. 2000; D. J. Mu˜ noz et al. 2016). If the influence of SRFs such as general relativity and tidal precession is negligible, the maximum eccentric-ity achieved by the inner planet during ZLK oscillations (eb, max ), assuming an initially circular orbit, depends only on ψbc and is given by eb, max = p1 − (5 /3) cos 2 ψbc 

(D. Fabrycky & S. Tremaine 2007). However, in the presence of SRFs, the growth of eccentricity is sup-pressed, and thus the maximum eccentricity achieved is reduced. In the quadrupole limit, eb, max can be ob-tained analytically by solving the equation (E. B. Ford et al. 2000; B. Liu et al. 2015): 

ϵGR 

 1

jb, min 

− 1



+ ϵtide 

15 

" 1 + 3 e2 

> b, max

+ 38 e4

> b, max

j9

> b, min

− 1

#

= 98

e2

> b, max

j2

> b, min



j2 

> b, min

− 53 cos 2 ψbc 



,

(9) where jb, min =

q

1 − e2

> b, max

. We neglect the contribu-tion from rotation-induced planetary oblateness here, as it is typically at least an order of magnitude smaller than the dominant GR and tidal bulge precession terms. The dimensionless parameters ϵGR and ϵtide are related to apsidal precession due to GR and the tidal bulge raised on the planet by the host star, respectively. These are given by (P. P. Eggleton & L. Kiseleva-Eggleton 2001): 

ϵGR = 3G(M⋆ + Mp)2a3 

> c

(1 − e2 

> c

)(3 /2) 

a4 

> b

c2Mc

, (10a) 

ϵtide = 15 M⋆(M⋆ + Mp)a3 

> c

(1 − e2 

> c

)(3 /2) k2,p R5

> p

a3 

> b

MpMc

, (10b) where c is the speed of light and k2,p is the planet’s Love number. When the high eccentricity episodes drive the inner planet close enough to the star, they drive tidal migra-tion. The migration timescale can be estimated by us-ing the fraction of time spent near eccentricity peaks, 

∼

q

1 − e2

> b, max

, yielding the orbit-averaged decay rate (M. Vick et al. 2019) 

t−1ZLK =



|t−1ST |p1 − e2



> eb,max

(11) where t−1ST is the timescale of orbital decay due to static tides and is given by (M. E. Alexander 1973; P. Hut 1981), 

t−1ST = 9n2

Q′

> p

M⋆

Mp

 Rp

a

5 

Na(e) − N 2(e)Ω( e)



, (12) where Q′ 

> p

is the reduced tidal quality factor of the planet, n is the planet’s mean motion, and 

Na(e) = 1 + 31 2 e2 + 255 8 e4 + 185 16 e6 + 25 64 e8

(1 − e2) 15 2

, (13) 

N (e) = 1 + 15 2 e2 + 45 8 e4 + 516 e6

(1 − e2)6 , (14) 6 Sethi et. al. 

Ω( e) = 1 + 3 e2 + 38 e4

(1 − e2) 92

. (15) ZLK oscillations are quenched once the apsidal pre-cession induced by SRFs become comparable to, or ex-ceeds, the precession rate driven by perturbations from the outer companion. Figure 1, based on a similar fig-ure in T. Lu et al. (2025), illustrates this behavior for an example system with Mp = 4 M⊕, Mc = 0 .3 M⊙,

M⋆ = 1 M⊙, ec = 0 .85, ac = 100 au, Xatm = 0 .04, 

ψbc = 90 ◦, and k2,p = 0 .25. The full SRF-limited ec-centricity is obtained by solving for eb, max in Eq. 9 that includes both GR and tidal precession simultaneously, and is shown by the pink curve. The pink curve defines the orbital state of the planet post-ZLK quenching, from which the planet begins subsequent tidal migration ap-proximately along a constant-angular-momentum track, shown by the gray dashed curves. 2.3.2. Tidal Migration 

After ZLK quenching, we neglect further gravitational perturbations from body c and evolve the planet as a two-body star–planet system. Each planet is initial-ized at its post-ZLK orbital state, ( a0, e 0), where e0 is the SRF-limited maximum eccentricity obtained from Eq. 9 at the quenching semi-major axis a0. The subse-quent orbital evolution is governed by equilibrium tides in the constant time-lag approximation (P. Hut 1980; J. Leconte et al. 2010). We include only tides raised by the star on the planet and neglect tides raised by the planet on the star, since for Neptune-sized planets the latter contribution is typi-cally smaller by a factor ≲ 10 −4 and therefore negligible (R. Sethi & S. C. Millholland 2025). For simplicity, we also assume zero planetary obliquity. Under these as-sumptions, the semi-major axis and eccentricity evolve as follows (J. Leconte et al. 2010): 1

ada dt = 4aGM ⋆Mp

K

h

N (e) ωp

n − Na(e)

i

, (16) 1

ede dt = 11 aGM ⋆Mp

K



Ωe(e) ωp

n − 18 11 Ne(e)



, (17) where Na(e), and N (e) are given in Eqs. 13 & 14. K is the characteristic luminosity scale given by 

K = 9n

4Q′

> p

 GM 2

> ⋆

Rp

  Rp

a

6

, (18) and Ω e(e), N e(e) are defined as: Ωe(e) = 1 + 32 e2 + 18 e4

(1 − e2)5 , (19) 

Ne(e) = 1 + 15 4 e2 + 15 8 e4 + 564 e6

(1 − e2)13 /2 . (20) We also assume that the planet’s spin frequency, ωp has reached an equilibrium state such that dω/dt = 0 and is given by ωp = ωeq = nN (e)/Ω( e), where Ω( e) is defined in Eq. 15. We note that our coupled evolution model does not model the ZLK phase explicitly; rather, we use the equa-tions from §2.3.1 to initialize planets in a post-ZLK state and then migrate them according to the equations just presented. Further details are given in the next section.  

> 3.

POPULATION SYNTHESIS The construction of our synthetic planet population proceeds in six steps summarized below. 

• Step 1: Sample the star and planet prop-erties. We draw the {M⋆, P orb , M core , X init atm , Q ′

> p

}

from distributions specified later in the section. 

• Step 2: Sample the perturber parameters. 

For each system, we sample the parameters of body c, {Mc, P c, e c}. We also draw ψbc , restricting it to values for which efficient ZLK excitation can occur. 

• Step 3: Select dynamically stable systems. 

Using the sampled parameters, we retain only sys-tems that satisfy the hierarchical stability criterion (Eq. 8). 

• Step 4: Determine post-ZLK orbital state. 

Assuming ZLK oscillations are quenched at the semi-major axis corresponding to the sampled in-ner orbital period ( Porb ), we solve for the SRF-limited maximum eccentricity using Eq. 9. The resulting pair, ( a0, e 0), is defined as the post-ZLK orbital state. 

• Step 5: Apply physical and timescale cuts. 

We remove planets with pericenter distances inside the Roche limit and/or with ZLK-driven migration timescales longer than 100 Myr. 

• Step 6: Simulate coupled evolution for sur-viving population. The remaining systems com-prise the post-ZLK population, and we model their coupled thermal, atmospheric mass-loss, and tidal evolution. Each of these steps are described in detail in §3.1– §3.4. 3.1. Star and planet properties 

We first sample the intrinsic properties of the host star and inner planet. For each system, we draw M⋆, Porb ,

Mcore , Xinit atm , and Q′

> p

.Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 7

Table 2. Summary of the sampled parameters used for population synthesis 

Quantity Distribution / value Notes 

M⋆ N (1 .04 M⊙, 0.15 2 M 2

> ⊙

) Host-star mass; CKS-motivated distribution 

Porb Smooth broken power law P0 = 5 .75 d, k1 = 2 .31, k2 = −0.08; restricted to [2 , 1000] days 

Mcore Log-normal μM = 3 .72 M⊕, σM = 0 .44; restricted to [2 , 20] M⊕

Xinit atm Log-normal μX = 0 .04, σX = 0 .51 

Q′ 

> p

Discrete uniform Q′ 

> p

∈ { 10 4, 10 5, 10 6}

Core composition Fixed Earth-like rock/iron core composition 

q N (0 .23 , 0.42 2) Companion-to-inner-system mass ratio; reject q ≤ 0

Mc Mc = q(Mp + M⋆) Companion mass derived from sampled qPc Log-normal μlog 10 Pc = 5 .03, σlog 10 Pc = 2 .28 

ec Rayleigh or thermal Rayleigh for Pc < 1000 d; thermal distribution for Pc > 1000 d 

ψbc Truncated normal Centered at 90 ◦ with σ = 5 ◦, restricted to 39 .2◦–140 .8◦

For the stellar mass, we adopt a Gaussian distribution motivated by the California-Kepler Survey (CKS) (B. J. Fulton et al. 2017), M⋆ ∼ N (μM⋆ , σ 2 

> M⋆

), where μM⋆ =1.04 M⊙ and σM⋆ = 0 .15 M⊙, following J. G. Rogers & J. E. Owen (2021). 

Porb is sampled from the long-period branch of a broken power-law distribution motivated by occurrence rate observations (A. W. Howard et al. 2012; F. Fressin et al. 2013; C. D. Dressing & D. Charbonneau 2015; E. A. Petigura et al. 2018). We restrict the range to 

Porb ∈ [50 , 1000] days and sample from 

dN dP orb 

∝

 Porb 

P0

k

, (21) with k = −0.08. Because this distribution is motivated by mature planet populations, it serves as an observa-tionally motivated prior for the reservoir of planets avail-able to undergo ZLK-driven HEM. The true primordial distribution of HEM progenitors is poorly constrained. The planet’s core mass and initial atmospheric mass fraction are drawn from log-normal distributions adopted by Y. Wu (2019); similar functional forms were also used by J. G. Rogers & J. E. Owen (2021). These distributions are given by: 

dN d log Mcore 

∝ exp 



− (log Mcore − log μM )2

2σ2

> M



, (22) 

dN d log Xinit atm 

∝ exp 



− (log Xinit atm − log μX )2

2σ2

> X



, (23) where μM = 3 .72 M⊕, σM = 0 .44, and μX = 0 .04, 

σX = 0 .51. We further restrict the sampled core masses to Mcore ∈ [2 , 20] M⊕, corresponding to the range most relevant for planets expected to evolve into sub-Neptune population over ∼Gyr timescales. Typical values for the reduced tidal quality factor ( Q′

> p

)are highly uncertain. For this analysis, we draw Q′ 

> p

uni-formly from the discrete set {10 4, 10 5, 10 6}, based on Solar System planets (C. D. Murray & S. F. Dermott 1999; W. C. Tittemore & J. Wisdom 1990; K. Zhang & D. P. Hamilton 2008), and consistent with recent population-level studies that model sub-Neptune and Neptune-size planets with Q′ 

> p

values in a similar range (A. Puranam & K. Batygin 2018; S. Millholland et al. 2020; R. Sethi & S. C. Millholland 2025). We adopt an Earth-like rock/iron core composition, following previous evolutionary studies of sub-Neptunes (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; B. J. Fulton et al. 2017). We note, however, that the true sub-Neptune population may exhibit a broader diversity of interior compositions (e.g., J. L. Bean et al. 2021; R. Luque & E. Pall´ e 2022; L. Parc et al. 2024). 3.2. Perturber Parameters 

We next assign an outer companion, body c, to each star–planet system. This companion provides the exter-nal perturbation to drive ZLK oscillations. The param-eters Pc, Mc, ec, and ψbc determine whether the system can undergo efficient ZLK excitation. 

Mc is sampled by drawing a mass ratio q from a nor-mal distribution following D. Fabrycky & S. Tremaine (2007), q ∼ N (μq = 0 .23 , σ q = 0 .42). We reject un-physical draws with q ≤ 0. The companion mass is then computed as Mc = q (Mp + M⋆), where Mp =

Mcore (1 + Xatm ) is defined from the sampled Mcore and 

Xinit atm .We draw the outer-companion orbital period, Pc (in days) from a log-normal distribution with μlog 10 Pc =5.03 and σlog 10 Pc = 2 .28, following D. Raghavan et al. (2010), who characterized the period distribution of solar-type stellar companions using combined spectro-scopic and imaging surveys. 8 Sethi et. al. 0 4 8 12 16 20 Core Mass, Mcore [M ]               

> 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 Density 10 410 310 210 110 0
> Xinit atm
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 0500 1000 Orbital Period, Porb [days] 0.00000 0.00025 0.00050 0.00075 0.00100 Density 0.0 0.5 1.0 SRF-Limited Eccentricity, e0
> 0510 15

Figure 2. Distributions of the sampled planet properties and post-ZLK quenching orbital conditions for the planet population that we evolve. The top panels show the core mass, Mcore , and initial atmospheric mass, fraction, Xinit atm ,while the bottom panels show the orbital period, Porb , and SRF-limited eccentricity at quenching, e0. The concentra-tion of systems at high e0 reflects the selection of planets undergoing efficient ZLK-driven high-eccentricity migration. 

The distribution for ec depends on Pc (A. Duquen-noy & M. Mayor 1991). For systems with Pc < 1000 days, ec is drawn from a Rayleigh distribution, p(e)de =(e/σ 2 

> c

) exp ( −e2/2σ2 

> c

)de , with ⟨e2⟩1/2 = 0.33, corre-sponding to σe = ⟨e2⟩1/2/√2. For wider systems with 

Pc > 1000 d, eccentricities are drawn from an Ambart-sumian (thermal) distribution, p(e) de = 2 e de (D. Fab-rycky & S. Tremaine 2007). 

ψbc is drawn from a truncated normal distribution cen-tered at 90 ◦ with a standard deviation of 5 ◦, restricted to the classical ZLK window of 39 .2◦ ≤ ψbc ≤ 140 .8◦. This preferentially samples configurations that efficiently ex-cite high eccentricities. A summary of sampling distributions for the star, planet, and body c are presented in Table 2. 3.2.1. Dynamical stability and post-ZLK orbital state 

After sampling the system parameters, we require the resulting hierarchical triple to satisfy the dynamical sta-bility criterion given by Eq. 8. Systems that fail this con-dition are rejected and resampled. We then determine the orbital state of the inner planet at ZLK quenching. We assume that ZLK oscillations are quenched at the semi-major axis corresponding to the sampled Porb , and we calculate the SRF-limited maximum eccentricity by solving for eb, max in Eq. 9. The semi-major axis and eccentricity pair, ( a0, e 0), is the orbital state at ZLK 10 0 10 1 10 2 10 3

Orbital Period [days] 

10 1

> Rp [R ]

## Initial Pre-Migration Population 

Figure 3. Initial period-radius distribution of the planet population before coupled evolution. The shaded back-ground shows a Gaussian KDE of the full modeled sample, while gray open circles show a random subset of ∼ 2000 plan-ets for visual reference. Each planet is evaluated at the start of its coupled thermal, atmospheric, and tidal evolution, so the ensemble combines systems with different ZLK-quench-ing/onset times rather than representing a single fixed-age snapshot. 

quenching and is used as the initial orbital condition for subsequent evolution. 3.3. Physical and Timescale Cuts 

Lastly, we apply two additional cuts to isolate systems that can plausibly contribute to the sub-Neptune pop-ulation through efficient ZLK-driven migration. First, we remove systems whose pericenter distance lies inside the Roche limit, aroche > a 0(1 − e0), where aroche =2.44 Rp(M⋆/M p)1/3, since these planets are expected to undergo tidal disruption. Second, we remove systems with tZLK > 100 Myr. This cut isolates planets for which ZLK-driven migration occurs early. We adopt 

tZLK as an estimate for the ZLK quenching time and use it as an initial time for subsequent coupled thermal, atmospheric, and tidal evolution. From an initial sample of ∼ 200 , 000 systems, we re-tain ∼ 20 , 000 viable systems that satisfy both criteria. We emphasize that this filtered sample should not be interpreted as representative of all planetary systems. Rather, it represents the subset dynamically capable of undergoing efficient ZLK-driven HEM while avoid-ing tidal disruption, allowing our model to provide an upper-limit on the contribution of HEM channel to sub-Neptune occurrence rates. Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 9DESERT 

> RADIUS VALLEY

Figure 4. Final period-radius distribution of the evolved synthetic population at 3 Gyr. The contours show the Gaus-sian KDE of the model population. The blue line and shaded band mark the observed radius valley relation and its uncer-tainty from V. Van Eylen et al. (2018), while the red dashed curve shows the approximate boundary of the hot-Neptune desert from A. Castro-Gonz´ alez et al. (2024). 

Following all the cuts, the sampled distributions of 

Mcore , Xinit atm , Porb , and e0, are shown in Figure 2. 3.4. Coupled Evolution 

We evolve each system in our synthetic population for-ward to 3 Gyr. The starting time depends on the system as tstart = 10 Myr + tZLK , where 10 Myr represents a fiducial disk lifetime (which we do not model). The sec-ond term, tZLK , is our estimate of the time required for ZLK-driven excitation to be quenched by SRFs obtained from Eq. 11. Since tZLK is estimated separately for each system, different planets begin their coupled evo-lution at different absolute ages. At tstart , each system is initialized with parameters M⋆, Mcore , Xinit atm , post-quenching orbital elements ( a0, e 0), and a high initial en-tropy, S = 8 kB/m H, appropriate for young planets. We do not account for very early atmospheric loss or “boil-off,” which could produce lower initial entropies (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2016). The initial period-radius distri-bution of the progenitor population is shown in Figure 3. We then evolve the planets using our coupled model for thermal contraction, atmospheric mass loss, and tidal orbital evolution. We solve four coupled ordi-nary differential equations: the entropy evolution equa-tion, dS/dt (Eq. 1); the atmospheric mass-loss equation, 

dX atm /dt (Eq. 2), using the orbit-averaged mass-loss rate from Eq. 7; and the equilibrium-tide equations for 

da/dt (Eq. 16) and de/dt (Eq. 17). At each timestep, we 10 1 10 2 10 3           

> Time [Myr] 10 1
> 10 0
> a [AU] Tidal migration 10 110 210 3
> Time [Myr] 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> e
> Tidal circularization 10 110 210 3
> Time [Myr] 10 4
> 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 10 0
> Xatm
> Atmospheric mass loss 10 110 210 3
> Time [Myr] 246810
> Rp [R ]
> Radius Evolution

Figure 5. Coupled evolutionary tracks for 1000 randomly selected systems from the synthetic population. The four panels show semi-major axis evolution, eccentricity damping, atmospheric mass loss, and radius evolution. The dashed line at Xatm = 10 −4 in the atmospheric mass loss evolution panel, marks the stripping threshold, below which planets are treated as bare rocky cores. 

self-consistently update the planet’s radius, total mass, and equilibrium temperature. The evolved variables are S(t), Xatm (t), a(t), and e(t). Mcore is held fixed throughout the integration. The equilibrium tempera-ture is updated from the instantaneous orbital elements as it is required for thermal evolution. For eccentric orbits, we use the orbit-averaged Teq value (A. Quirren-bach 2022), 

Teq (t) = T⋆

s

R⋆

2a(t) [1 − e2(t)] −1/8, (24) where we assume full heat redistribution and a fixed bond albedo AB = 0. Nonzero albedos would re-duce Teq by a factor of (1 − AB )1/4. We estimate stellar radii ( R⋆) and effective temperatures ( T⋆) us-ing approximate scalings, R⋆ ≈ R⊙(M⋆/M ⊙)0.8, and 

T⋆ ≈ T⊙(M⋆/M ⊙)0.48 from empirical mass-radius and mass-temperature relations for main-sequence stars (R. Kippenhahn & A. Weigert 1990; B. W. Carroll &D. A. Ostlie 1996). We then compute the planet ra-dius by interpolating the precomputed structure grid, 

Rp(t) = Rp[Mcore , X atm (t), T eq (t), S (t)], as described in Section 2.1. The total planet mass is updated sepa-rately using the instantaneous atmospheric mass frac-tion, Mp(t) = Mcore [1 + Xatm (t)]. These updated values 10 Sethi et. al.                  

> Figure 6. Snapshots of the synthetic planet population at three ages: 50 Myr, 500 Myr, and 3 Gyr. The upper panels show Gaussian KDEs of the population in the Porb −Rpplane, with ∼2000 randomly selected planets overplotted as grey points for visual reference. The blue shaded region marks the sub-Neptune bin used to compute occurrence rates, defined by Porb <12 days and 1 .8< R p/R ⊕<10. The lower panels show the corresponding atmospheric mass fractions, highlighting the growth of the stripped-cores that populate the super-Earth regime. The pile-up at Xatm = 10 −4reflects our numerical stripping floor, below which planets are treated as fully stripped rocky cores.

of Rp(t), M p(t), and Teq (t) are then used in the atmo-spheric mass loss (Eq. 3) and equilibrium tide equations (Eq. 16 & Eq. 17), ensuring that the thermal, atmo-spheric, and orbital evolution remain coupled through-out the integration. When Xatm < 10 −4, we classify the planet as fully stripped and set dX atm /dt = 0 for the remainder of the integration. From that point onward, the planet is treated as a bare Earth-composition core, and its ra-dius is computed from a solid planet mass-radius re-lation from J. J. Fortney et al. (2007) with iron mass fraction, Xiron = 0 .33 and ice mass fraction, Xice = 0. Example evolutionary tracks for ∼ 1000 randomly se-lected systems from our synthetic population are shown in Figure 5.  

> 4.

RESULTS 4.1. Demographic Features of the Evolved Population 

The synthetic population of ∼ 20 , 000 systems is evolved from tstart to 3 Gyr using the coupled evolu-tion framework described in § 3.4. Before measuring the age-dependent occurrence rate, we first examine the final period-radius distribution at ∼ 3 Gyr to check the overall behavior of the model. As shown in Figure 4, the evolved population qualitatively recovers two key demo-graphic features, the radius valley (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; B. J. Fulton et al. 2017) and the hot-Neptune desert (G. M. Szab´ o & L. L. Kiss 2011; T. Mazeh et al. 2016). In particular, we find a dearth of planets near 

∼ 2R⊕, broadly consistent with the observed radius val-ley (e.g., V. Van Eylen et al. 2018), separating super-Earths that have lost most of their primordial H/He envelopes from sub-Neptunes that retain non-negligible atmospheres. The population also remains sparse in the hot-Neptune desert region (approximate P − Rp bound-aries following A. Castro-Gonz´ alez et al. 2024), suggest-ing that the coupled effects of atmospheric escape, ther-mal contraction, and tidal evolution limit the survival of highly irradiated Neptune-size planets at short orbital periods. The recovery of these broad demographic fea-tures is encouraging and further motivates using the cou-pled evolution framework for modeling the sub-Neptune occurrence rate evolution with age. 4.2. Time Evolution of the Synthetic Population 

To examine the time-dependent evolution, we first consider snapshots at 50 Myr, 500 Myr, and 3 Gyr, as shown in Figure 6. The blue shaded region marks our close-in sub-Neptune bin. By 50 Myr, ∼ 32% of the systems reach short orbital periods, and the population already begins to separate into sub-Neptunes that retain H/He envelopes and stripped super-Earths. This early Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 11 atmospheric stripping is also evident from the pile-up near Xatm ≃ 10 −4 in the lower panel of Figure 6. The subsequent evolution is governed by two compet-ing effects: (i) tidal migration, which moves additional planets into the sub-Neptune bin, and (ii) atmospheric mass loss & thermal contraction, which can move plan-ets out of the bin by reducing their radii below 1 .8 R⊕.Atmospheric stripping is strongly time-dependent. Be-tween 50 and 500 Myr, the number of stripped cores increases substantially, with an additional ∼ 24% of the full population entering the stripped core pile-up near 

Xatm ≃ 10 −4. In contrast, between 500 Myr and 3 Gyr, the stripped core population grows only modestly, with only an additional ∼ 5% of the population becoming stripped cores. Thus, most of the atmospheric stripping occurs within the first few hundred Myr, when planets are still inflated and the stellar XUV luminosities are high. This behavior is consistent with previous photo-evaporation studies (e.g., J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; J. G. Rogers & J. E. Owen 2021), although our calcu-lation further couples it to tidal migration and thermal contraction. We next quantify this evolution in terms of occur-rence rates. The sub-Neptune and super-Earth occur-rence rates are computed as the percentage of the full 

∼ 20 ,000 planet sample that lies within each correspond-ing period-radius bin. We note that this estimate is im-perfect since we have not accounted for planet multiplic-ity, the underlying primordial planet distribution, and the fact that not all planets are expected to undergo effi-cient ZLK-driven HEM (refer to § 5.3 for further discus-sion). Our model does not capture these effects and can only provide an upper-limit estimate of the contribution that the HEM channel makes to the evolution of small-planet occurrence rates. We therefore focus primarily on the age-dependent trends rather than on matching the absolute observed occurrence rates. With these caveats in mind, Figure 7 displays the occurrence rate evolution over time. The behavior can be summarized in terms of three temporal regimes: 1. Rapid HEM phase : During this phase, HEM very quickly delivers planets to short orbital pe-riods within ≲ 15 Myr, causing the sub-Neptune occurrence rate to rise sharply. This early deliv-ery is a consequence of our model retaining only systems capable of efficient HEM, most of which reach very high eccentricities. Indeed, > 90% of the population has e0 > 0.9 at ZLK quenching (see Figure 2). 2. Efficient photoevaporation phase : This phase spans ∼ 15–110 Myr. During this interval, addi-Effi cient    

> Photoevaporation
> Rapid HEM
> Late Tidal Migration
> Figure 7. Occurrence-rate evolution of sub-Neptunes and super-Earths from the coupled evolution model. The shaded regions indicate three qualitative phases: rapid HEM, which delivers planets to short periods within ≲15 Myr; efficient photoevaporation, during which atmospheric stripping re-duces the sub-Neptune occurrence rate and increases the su-per-Earth occurrence rate; and late tidal migration, where some planets continue to enter the close-in bin and atmo-spheric escape becomes less efficient.

tional planets continue to migrate into the sub-Neptune bin, but photoevaporation is also very ef-ficient. Because photoevaporation dominates over tidal migration during this phase, the sub-Neptune occurrence rate declines mildly and the super-Earth occurrence rate continues to rise. 3. Late tidal migration phase : This phase begins after ∼ 110 Myr. At these later ages, atmospheric escape becomes less efficient, and only a small frac-tion of planets are stripped. The occurrence rate evolution is then dominated by the small popula-tion of planets that continue to tidally migrate into the close-in bin, producing the modest increase in the sub-Neptune occurrence rate toward Gyr ages. As a sanity check, we tested the inclusion of core-powered mass loss, a possible late-time atmospheric es-cape channel (S. Ginzburg et al. 2018; A. Gupta & H. E. Schlichting 2019), on a representative subset of ∼ 2000 systems. The final period-radius distribution is broadly unchanged in this test, suggesting that the population-level trends reported here remain robust even though our coupled evolution model includes photoevaporation as the only atmospheric escape channel. We find that in systems where core-powered mass loss would be most ef-fective, photoevaporation is typically even stronger and therefore dominates the atmospheric escape, while plan-ets that retain H/He envelopes generally have larger core 12 Sethi et. al. Late-time 

instabilities/ejections?     

> Figure 8. Comparison between the modeled and observed age evolution of the sub-Neptune occurrence rate. The purple shaded region shows the multiplicity-scaled model envelope from our coupled evolution model. Observational measurements from R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025), S. Vach et al. (2024), and J. L. Christiansen et al. (2023) are shown for comparison, with the corresponding period-radius cuts listed in the legend. Error bars denote 2 σuncertainties.

masses and correspondingly slower core-powered mass-loss rates. As a result, adding core-powered mass loss produces only minor additional changes to the occur-rence rate evolution. This is consistent with recent stud-ies finding that core-powered mass loss has a limited impact on small-planet demographics at late times (W. Misener & H. E. Schlichting 2021; J. G. Rogers et al. 2024; Y. Tang et al. 2024; J. E. Owen & H. E. Schlicht-ing 2024). 4.3. Comparison with Observations 

The main goal of this paper is to compare our mod-eled occurrence rate trends with the observations from R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025), who identified two possible age-dependent features. First, they found that the oc-currence rate of sub-Neptunes rises from 25 .89 +20 .18 

> −11 .67

%for young (10–100 Myr) stars to 148 .93 +93 .60 

> −61 .10

% for intermediate-age (100 Myr–1 Gyr) stars, although this increase remains consistent with no change within 2 σ

uncertainties. These estimates are broadly consistent with other independent measurements of young (S. Vach et al. 2024) and intermediate-age planets (J. L. Chris-tiansen et al. 2023). Second, R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) find a much lower occurrence rate, 7 .98 +0 .37 

> −0.35

%, for the old ( ≳ 1 Gyr) Kepler FGK sample, suggesting a decline from intermediate to Gyr ages. While these results were some of the first attempts to measure the evolution of short-period planet occurrence across young and intermediate ages, the current ob-servational constraints remain limited by small-number statistics. In particular, R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025)’s occurrence rate estimates were based on only 11 plan-ets within their adopted period, radius, and stellar-type cuts, with four planets in the 10–100 Myr bin and seven in the 100 Myr–1 Gyr bin. The occurrence rates were derived using TESS observations of nearby young clus-ters and moving groups, and, unlike Kepler, TESS was not designed as a homogeneous occurrence rate survey. Moreover, TESS’s target selection strategy can intro-duce additional biases for demographic studies (M. Faus-Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 13 naugh et al. 2021; A. Chontos et al. 2022). Our compari-son between the modeled and observed age trends should therefore be regarded as preliminary, motivating larger and more uniformly selected samples of young planets. With these observational limitations in mind, the mea-surements from R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) are com-pared with our coupled evolution model in Figure 8. We note again that this comparison is intended to test whether the model reproduces the two proposed age-dependent features: the rise of sub-Neptune occurrence rates from young to intermediate ages and the subse-quent decline from intermediate to old ages, rather than comparing the exact values. Because the observed oc-currence rates are reported as planets per star, while our model evolves only one planet per star, we show a multiplicity-scaled model envelope whose lower edge corresponds to the raw model prediction, and the upper edge shows the same prediction scaled upward by a fac-tor of two to illustrate an approximation of the possible contribution from multiple-planet systems. Further dis-cussion of this correction is provided in Appendix A. We organize the comparison between data and model into two sections as follows. 4.3.1. Young to Intermediate Age Evolution 

After the early rapid HEM phase, our model predicts a nearly flat evolution in the sub-Neptune occurrence rate, with variations within ∼ ± 6%. Thus, our coupled evolution model does not predict a rise from young to intermediate ages, unlike R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) observed. However, due to the large observational un-certainties, an approximately flat curve could still be consistent with the data from young and intermediate ages within the current 2 σ limits. 4.3.2. Intermediate to Old Age Evolution 

The main discrepancy appears when comparing the intermediate-age population with the old Kepler popu-lation. Our model does not reproduce the substantial decline in occurrence rate observed by R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025). Instead, after the efficient photoevapo-ration phase, planets cool and contract, photoevapora-tion weakens, and only a small fraction of planets are stripped. At the same time, residual tidal migration continues to supply a small number of new planets into the sub-Neptune bin. As a result, the model increases slightly toward the Gyr ages. Including core-powered mass loss does not resolve this discrepancy either. Thus, the physical processes included in our coupled evolution model are not sufficient to explain the ob-served decline from intermediate-age to old stellar popu-lations. This conclusion is supported by the population-level limits of the HEM fraction discussed in Ap-1 2 4 8 12 

Rp [R ]

0123Density         

> 50 Myr 3 gyr
> Figure 9. Modeled radius distributions at 50 Myr (pink) and 3 Gyr (purple). The step histograms show the binned distributions, while solid curves show Gaussian KDEs. Dashed vertical lines mark the KDE-inferred radius-valley or the minima between the two peaks.

pendix A, suggesting that HEM is not the only pathway shaping the occurrence-rate evolution of close-in sub-Neptunes. Additional formation or dynamical pathways are required, including potentially multi-planet dynam-ics, late-time dynamical instabilities, and possible differ-ences between cluster and field-star populations. These considerations will be addressed further in Section 5.3. At the same time, more homogeneous occurrence rate measurements across young, intermediate, and old stel-lar populations will be important for placing stronger constraints on the true age evolution. 4.4. Evolution of the Radius Valley 

Another angle to explore our results is the comparison between the modeled and observed time evolution of the radius valley. T. J. David et al. (2021) analyzed the CKS sample and found that the radius valley shifts to larger radii with increasing stellar age. Our coupled evolution model reproduces this behavior qualitatively, as shown in Figure 9, where we compare the radius distributions from our model at 50 Myr and 3 Gyr. The radius valley shifts toward slightly larger radii, while the sub-Neptune peak decreases and the super-Earth peak grows. This behavior indicates that a fraction of initially envelope-bearing sub-Neptunes lose their atmospheres and move into the super-Earth population. Planets stripped at later ages tend to have more massive cores than those stripped early. Their stripped remnants therefore oc-cupy somewhat larger radii within the super-Earth pop-ulation, shifting the valley between the two peaks toward larger radii. We do not expect an exact quantitative 14 Sethi et. al. 

match to the observed CKS radius distribution since our population represents only the subset of systems under-going efficient ZLK-driven HEM and does not include the full primordial population of super-Earths and sub-Neptunes.  

> 5.

DISCUSSION 5.1. Observational Predictions for Super-Earths 

Our analysis has so far focused on sub-Neptunes, but our coupled evolution model also has predictions for the super-Earth occurrence rate. Observationally, G. J. Bergsten et al. (2022) find that the old Kepler super-Earth occurrence rate is higher than the corresponding sub-Neptune occurrence rate. Our model reproduces this qualitative behavior. At ≳ 1 Gyr ages, the super-Earth occurrence rate exceeds the sub-Neptune occur-rence rate. The qualitative agreement at old ages motivates us to use the model to make predictions for younger and intermediate-age super-Earth populations. Because the model curve depends on the efficiency of the HEM chan-nel, the results should be interpreted with caution. Sen-sitivity tests discussed in Appendix A show that re-ducing the HEM efficiency lowers the normalization of the occurrence-rate curves without substantially alter-ing their general temporal evolution. Therefore, the relative occurrence rate evolution of sub-Neptunes and super-Earths provides a useful metric for observational prediction since it is less sensitive to the uncertain nor-malization of the HEM channel. There are two other caveats with our super-Earth oc-currence rates. First, our calculation does not include a primordial super-Earth population that may already exist after disk dispersal (e.g., E. Chiang & G. Laughlin 2013; A. Izidoro et al. 2021). Second, our synthetic pop-ulation is restricted to Mcore ∈ [2 , 20] M⊕, since the pri-mary goal of this study is to model the occurrence-rate evolution of sub-Neptunes. This choice excludes lower-mass cores that would be more easily stripped after mi-gration and could therefore contribute substantially to the super-Earth population. In additional tests, we find that planets with Mcore ≲ 1M⊕ always become super-Earths after migration, while a large fraction of planets with 1 < M core /M ⊕ < 2 are also stripped, although a small number can remain sub-Neptunes. In the synthetic population, sub-Neptunes initially dominate the super-Earths. At the end of rapid HEM phase, the super-Earth occurrence rate is lower than the sub-Neptune occurrence rate by approximately 26 .5%. However, since the predicted super-Earth occurrence rate is a lower limit, we cannot confidently predict that the true young super-Earth occurrence rate must ini-tially be lower than the sub-Neptune occurrence rate. The more robust prediction is the subsequent growth of the super-Earth population. Atmospheric stripping in-creases the super-Earth occurrence rate, especially dur-ing the efficient photoevaporation phase, and the super-Earth occurrence rate overtakes the sub-Neptune occur-rence rate by ∼ 90 Myr. Since including primordial super-Earths or lower-mass cores would only increase the super-Earth occurrence rate, this transition should occur by ∼ 90 Myr at the latest. Thus, in our model, the combined effects of HEM and photoevaporation predict that (i) the super-Earth oc-currence rate should rise from young to intermediate ages, and (ii) the super-Earth occurrence rate should exceed the sub-Neptune occurrence rate by ∼ 90 Myr at the latest. HEM-delivered super-Earths may also retain distinctive architectures: tides may erase their eccentric-ities but stellar spin–orbit misalignments may persist for longer ages. Residual eccentricities or stellar obliquities could therefore provide tentative evidence that individ-ual super-Earths were delivered through this channel. Observationally testing our occurrence rate predic-tions will require better constraints on young super-Earths. Such measurements remain difficult because young stars are rapidly rotating (M. P. Battley et al. 2020; R. Sethi et al. 2026b), active (A. D. Feinstein et al. 2020), spotted, and frequently variable (M. P. Bat-tley et al. 2022; R. Sethi & D. V. Martin 2024), making shallow transits from small planets harder to detect and validate. Existing young planet occurrence studies have therefore focused mainly on larger planets (e.g., S. Vach et al. 2024; R. B. Fernandes et al. 2025; J. L. Chris-tiansen et al. 2023). However, recent discoveries of small planets around young stars show that this regime is be-coming increasingly accessible (e.g., B. K. Capistrant et al. 2024; M. G. Barber et al. 2025). Future mea-surements of young super-Earth occurrence rates will therefore provide a direct test of our prediction. 5.2. Tidally Induced Radius Inflation 

Tidally induced radius inflation is an important ad-ditional effect to consider when modeling HEM-driven occurrence-rate evolution. For eccentric planets on short-period orbits, time-varying distortions in the planet’s shape dissipate orbital energy as heat inside the planet (P. Hut 1981; B. Jackson et al. 2008; J. Leconte et al. 2010). This heating can significantly inflate plan-etary radii, in some cases by factors of order ∼ 2 for Neptune-size planets (e.g., P. Bodenheimer et al. 2001; B. Levrard et al. 2007; S. Millholland 2019; S. Millhol-land et al. 2020; T. Lu et al. 2025; R. Sethi & S. C. Millholland 2025; H. Im et al. 2026). Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 15 10 1 10 2 10 3

Age [Myr]  

> 010 20 30 40 50
> Occurrence rate [%]  No Tidal Inflation With Tidal Inflation
> Figure 10. Effect of tidally induced radius inflation on the sub-Neptune occurrence-rate evolution. The purple and or-ange curves show the coupled evolution model without and with tidal inflation, respectively.

This effect is especially relevant because both tidal migration and atmospheric mass loss depend sensitively on Rp. In our coupled evolution model, Rp evolves through thermal cooling and atmospheric mass loss, but we haven’t included a tidal heating contribution to the planet’s internal energy budget. To assess the possi-ble impact of tidally induced radius inflation, we run a modified version of the coupled evolution model that accounts for tidal heating. The details of this implemen-tation are described in Appendix B. Because most planets in our synthetic population be-gin on highly eccentric orbits with small pericenter dis-tances, unrestricted tidal dissipation can drive runaway inflation (T. Hallatt & S. Millholland 2026a,b). If the dissipated energy is efficiently deposited in the deep con-vective zone, many planets rapidly lose their H/He en-velopes and become stripped cores. Since modeling tidal heat deposition and transport is beyond the scope of this work, we adopt a phenomenological cap on the tidal lu-minosity deposited at the deep convective zone, assum-ing all the excess tidal power is radiated away. The sen-sitivity of the occurrence rate evolution to the adopted tidal luminosity cap is explored in Appendix B.1. We therefore treat this as an exploratory calculation, aimed at assessing how moderate tidally induced radius infla-tion could qualitatively affect the occurrence-rate evo-lution. We compare the occurrence rate evolution with and without tidally induced radius inflation in Figure 10. Including tidal inflation changes both the normalization and the shape of the sub-Neptune occurrence-rate evo-lution. Tidal heating inflates the planetary radius, and larger radii enhance tidal dissipation, allowing more sys-tems to migrate rapidly into the close-in bin during the early rapid HEM phase. As a result, the early occur-rence rate peak derived from the tidal inflation model is ∼ 12% higher compared to that derived from the no inflation model. The rapid HEM phase also lasts slightly longer when tidal inflation is included, extend-ing to ∼ 25 Myr compared to ∼ 15 Myr in the model without tides. The subsequent evolution is also modified. Inflated planets have larger radii and more weakly bound en-velopes, making photoevaporative mass loss more effi-cient. As a result, the decline after the rapid HEM phase is stronger and more extended when tidal infla-tion is included. Without tidal inflation, the drop in the sub-Neptune occurrence rate ends by ∼ 110 Myr, with a total drop of only ∼ 5%. With tidal inflation, planets remain susceptible to atmospheric stripping for longer, so the decline continues until ∼ 500 Myr and decline by 

∼ 19%. Both models remain consistent with the large obser-vational uncertainties reported by R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025). However, neither model supports the interpre-tation that the sub-Neptune occurrence rate might rise gradually from young to intermediate ages because of continued tidal migration. In both cases, the migration-driven sharp rise occurs early on at very young ages, following which the no inflation model is roughly flat whereas the tidal-inflation model declines because mass loss becomes more efficient. Moreover, including tidal inflation still does not re-produce the sharp decline in occurrence rates from in-termediate to old ages observed by R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025). In the no inflation case, the occurrence rate in-creases slowly toward Gyr ages due to continued tidal migration of a small residual population. With tidal in-flation, this late-time increase in occurrence rate is sup-pressed and it remains approximately flat. This occurs because radius inflation enhances tidal dissipation which reduces the circularization timescales causing most plan-ets in our sample to reach the close-in bin during the rapid HEM phase. At the same time, most of the atmo-spheric stripping occurs within the first ∼ 500 Myr. At later ages, planets have largely circularized, tidal heat-ing has weakened, radii have contracted, and photoevap-oration has become less efficient. As a result, the model neither strongly replenishes the sub-Neptune population nor removes enough planets from it to produce a sub-stantial decline. Additionally, because tidal inflation en-hances early migration and also strengthens subsequent atmospheric stripping, the occurrence rate at 3 Gyr from 16 Sethi et. al. 

the tidal inflation model is slightly lower than in the no inflation case. 5.3. Model Caveats and Future Extensions 

Several ingredients not included in our coupled evo-lution model could affect the occurrence rates and their time evolution. First, our model assumes one planet per star and allows every modeled planet to undergo HEM. While growing evidence indicates a prevalence of HEM in close-in Neptunes and sub-Neptunes (e.g. V. Bourrier et al. 2023; H. Yu & F. Dai 2024; A. Castro-Gonz´ alez et al. 2024; T. Lu et al. 2025; A. Castro-Gonz´ alez et al. 2026), simultaneously, a substantial fraction of close-in planets ranging from super-Earth to Neptune sizes re-side in compact multis (J. J. Lissauer et al. 2011; J. F. Rowe et al. 2014; W. Zhu et al. 2018). These systems of-ten exhibit correlated sizes and orbital spacings charac-teristic of “peas-in-a-pod” architectures (S. Millholland et al. 2017; L. M. Weiss et al. 2018). Such compact ar-chitectures cannot be reconciled with large-amplitude ZLK oscillations followed by HEM (G. Takeda et al. 2008; L. Wei et al. 2021; T. H. Faridani et al. 2022), and other formation pathways must explain them (e.g. A. Izidoro et al. 2017). This is particularly relevant for the occurrence-rate measurements considered here since more than half of the planets in the S. Vach et al. (2024); R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) samples belong to known multi-planet systems. Our model should therefore be interpreted as describing only the subset of systems in which HEM remains dynamically viable. Compact multis can also undergo dynamical evolution that is absent from the present calculation. Resonant coupling (D. C. Fabrycky et al. 2014), secular interac-tions (Y. Wu & Y. Lithwick 2011), planet–planet scat-tering (S. Chatterjee et al. 2008), and ejections (F. A. Rasio & E. B. Ford 1996) can alter both the surviving planet multiplicity and the orbital distribution, mod-ifying the normalization and potentially the time de-pendence of the occurrence rate curve independently of HEM. The multiplicity correction used to illustrate the model envelope in Figure 8 is also only an approximate normalization, not a self-consistent model treatment of compact multi-planet dynamics. There is no obvious reason, however, for compact multi dynamics to produce the observed rise in sub-Neptune occurrence from young to intermediate ages since these systems are thought to be emplaced during the disk lifetime (either by in situ formation or disk mi-gration) (e.g. A. Izidoro et al. 2017). On the other hand, delayed dynamical instabilities at later times could re-duce the number of surviving close-in planets through collisions, mergers, or ejections and potentially con-tribute to the decline from intermediate to old ages (D. Tamayo et al. 2020; M. Goldberg & A. C. Petit 2026). We will explore their potential contribution to the late-time occurrence-rate decline in future work. Another limitation of our model is the simplified planet interior structure comprising Earth-like cores and H/He envelopes. Real sub-Neptunes must span a broader range of compositions, including volatile-rich in-teriors and more complex envelope structures (e.g., J. L. Bean et al. 2021; R. Luque & E. Pall´ e 2022; L. Parc et al. 2024). These differences can affect the mass-radius re-lation, atmospheric binding energy, cooling history, and therefore the occurrence-rate evolution. In addition, we model photoevaporation using a simple energy-limited approach, which may not fully capture the hydrodynam-ics of strongly irradiated close-in sub-Neptunes (e.g., R. Sethi et al. 2026a). Future work could explore more re-alistic hydrodynamic models, such as Wind-AE, that remain computationally tractable for population-level studies (M. I. Broome et al. 2025). Finally, our model does not specify the primordial close-in planet population after disk dispersal. Some super-Earths and sub-Neptunes may already be present at this stage through in-situ formation, or disk-driven migration (e.g., E. Chiang & G. Laughlin 2013; A. Izidoro et al. 2021). Therefore, the results presented in this paper only tell us about the contribution of the HEM channel to sub-Neptune occurrence rates, rather than the total close-in small-planet occurrence rate.  

> 6.

CONCLUSIONS Motivated by observations from R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025) of sub-Neptune occurrence rates over time, we set out to test the hypothesis that tidal migration and mass loss drive their evolution. We developed a unified framework that couples thermal cooling, atmospheric mass loss, and orbital evolution in close-in small plan-ets. We created a synthetic population of systems and subjected them to efficient ZLK-driven high-eccentricity migration, evolving them from their post-ZLK quench-ing time to 3 Gyr. We used this framework to estimate the maximum contribution that HEM can make to the age evolution of close-in small planets and compared the results with observed age-dependent trends. Our main results are summarized below. 1. The coupled evolution model qualitatively repro-duces key demographic features of the mature planet population, including the radius valley and the hot-Neptune desert. 2. The occurrence-rate evolution proceeds through three temporal regimes. In the first ∼ 15 Myr, Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 17 a rapid HEM phase delivers many planets to short orbital periods, producing a sharp rise in the sub-Neptune occurrence rate. The efficient photoevap-oration phase from ∼ 15 to 110 Myr reduces the occurrence rate of sub-Neptunes while increasing that of super-Earths. Finally, a late tidal migra-tion phase delivers a residual population of planets inwards. 3. Between 100 Myr and 1 Gyr, the occurrence rate increases by only ∼ 5%. Given the current 2 σ ob-servational uncertainties (R. B. Fernandes et al. 2025), such weak evolution remains compatible with the trends that could be inferred from the data, but it does not favor a scenario in which the occurrence rate rises from young to intermediate ages due to sustained tidal migration. 4. The model does not reproduce the sharp decline in sub-Neptune occurrence rate from intermediate to old ages observed by R. B. Fernandes et al. (2025). Instead, during this time, photoevaporation be-comes less efficient, while residual tidal migration continues to deliver a small number of planets into the close-in bin. Including core-powered mass loss does not resolve this discrepancy. The modeled occurrence rate increases mildly toward Gyr ages. In future work, additional physics will be needed to explain the decline in sub-Neptune occurrence rate from intermediate to old ages. Possibilities include multi-planet dynamics, late-time instabil-ities, and possible differences between cluster and field-star populations. 5. The model predicts that the radius valley evolves with age. As atmospheric stripping proceeds, the valley shifts towards larger radii, qualitatively con-sistent with the observational trends reported by T. J. David et al. (2021). 6. If the HEM channel contributes significantly to the close-in small-planet population, we predict a ris-ing super-Earth occurrence rate from young to in-termediate ages, with the super-Earth occurrence rate exceeding the sub-Neptune occurrence rate by 

∼ 90 Myr at the latest. 7. Including radius inflation from tidal heating pro-duces a higher early occurrence rate peak than in the no-inflation model and extends the rapid HEM phase to ∼ 25 Myr. Additionally, because the atmospheric mass loss is more efficient, the post-peak decline becomes stronger and lasts un-til ∼ 500 Myr. However, even with tidal inflation, the occurrence remains roughly flat at Gyr ages and still does not reproduce the observed decline from intermediate to old ages. Looking ahead, the most direct observational test of this picture will come from improved occurrence-rate measurements of young and intermediate-age small planets, especially super-Earths. Efforts such as the THYME collaboration are already expanding the sam-ple of young transiting planets (E. R. Newton et al. 2019, 2021; B. M. Tofflemire et al. 2021; B. K. Capistrant et al. 2024), but detecting small planets around young stars remains challenging. Improved light-curve mod-eling, stellar-activity mitigation, and targeted searches in young clusters will therefore be crucial for testing our predictions. Complementary constraints on planets during or shortly after the disk phase would also help determine how much of the small-planet population is primordial, rather than produced later by migration. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS R.S. gratefully acknowledges Ilaria Pascucci, Galen Bergsten, Tiger Lu, and Utkarsh for many helpful con-versations. This material is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under grant No. 2306391. R.S. acknowledges the support from the Quad Fellowship by International Institute of Education. S.M. acknowledges support from the Alfred P. Sloan Founda-tion through a Sloan Research Fellowship. APPENDIX  

> A.

OCCURRENCE-RATE NORMALIZATION Observed occurrence rates are commonly reported as the number of planets per star in a specified period-radius bin. These rates can therefore exceed 100% when multiple planets per star contribute to the same bin (e.g., G. J. Bergsten et al. 2022; J. L. Christiansen et al. 2023; S. Vach et al. 2024; R. B. Fernandes et al. 2025). Because our coupled evolution model only follows one planet per star, the modeled occurrence rate cannot ex-ceed 100% by construction. The raw model curve in Fig-ure 7 should thus be interpreted as the fraction of our simulated population occupying the sub-Neptune bin, rather than as a fully multiplicity-corrected number of planets per star. To make an approximate comparison with observed occurrence rates, the modeled curves in Figure 8 contain 18 Sethi et. al. 10 1 10 2 10 3

# Age [Myr] 

010 20 30 40          

> Sub-Neptune occurrence rate [%]
> Relaxed HEM selection Efficient HEM selection
> Figure 11. Sensitivity of the modeled sub-Neptune oc-currence rate to the HEM selection criteria. Purple and green curves show the age evolution of the sub-Neptune oc-currence rate for the efficient-HEM and relaxed-HEM pop-ulations, respectively. The efficient-HEM population uses
> tZLK <100 Myr and ψbc concentrated near 90 ◦, while the re-laxed-HEM population removes the timescale cut and draws
> ψbc uniformly across the ZLK-active window.

an envelope that represents the multiplicity correction. The lower edge of the envelope corresponds to the raw one planet per star prediction from our coupled evolu-tion model, while the upper edge rescales this prediction upward by a factor of two. This rescaling was not de-rived with a detailed population synthesis, but neverthe-less it represents an optimistic upper limit motivated by the fact that multi-planet systems contribute substan-tially to the observed small-planet population (e.g. W. Zhu et al. (2018) infer an average of 3 .0±0.3 planets per star within 400 days). Kepler demographics also show that roughly 40% of detected transiting planet candi-dates reside in multi-planet systems (J. J. Lissauer et al. 2011; J. F. Rowe et al. 2014). Alongside the multiplicity considerations, the modeled occurrence rates are also affected by the efficiency of the HEM channel. The synthetic planet population was constructed to isolate systems capable of efficient ZLK-driven HEM, using cuts such as tZLK < 100 Myr and ψbc 

concentrated near 90 ◦ (see § 3). To test the sensitivity of our results to these cuts, we repeated the evolution for a representative subset of ∼ 1500 systems after removing the tZLK timescale cut and drawing ψbc from a uniform distribution across the ZLK-active window. The result-ing occurrence-rate evolution is shown in Figure 11 Relaxing these selections substantially lowers the over-all sub-Neptune occurrence rate because a smaller frac-tion of systems reach high eccentricities needed for effi-cient HEM. The slight decline during the efficient pho-toevaporation phase described in § 4.2 is also less pro-nounced, because fewer planets are delivered to close-in orbits where photoevaporation can efficiently strip their envelopes. However, the general time evolution remains similar, featuring an initial rapid rise, a modest decrease or flattening during the efficient photoevapora-tion phase, and a subsequent increase toward ∼Gyr ages as tidal migration continues to deliver planets. In par-ticular, removing the selection cuts does not produce ei-ther a sustained rise from young to intermediate ages or a decline from intermediate to old ages as suggested by observations. Thus, while the HEM-efficiency selections primarily affect the normalization of the sub-Neptune occurrence rate curve and the strength of the early pho-toevaporation feature, the main age-dependent trends discussed in this work remain unchanged. More generally, the contribution of the HEM channel to the occurrence rate evolution of sub-Neptunes can be written schematically as, 

fsubNep ≃ fHEM fsim (t) (A1) where fsim (t) is the simulated occurrence rate from our coupled evolution model. The factor, fHEM ∈ (0 , 1] rep-resents the fraction of systems for which HEM is ef-fective. This expression is only an approximate nor-malization, since changing the HEM efficiency does not perfectly rescale the occurrence-rate curve, although its broad time-dependent behavior remains similar, as shown in the sensitivity tests above. Because our synthetic population is constructed using physical and timescale cuts that preferentially select systems capable of efficient HEM, it corresponds to the fHEM ≃ 1 limit. Therefore, the model envelope in Figure 8 should be in-terpreted as the maximum contribution that the ZLK-driven HEM channel could make to the sub-Neptune occurrence rate, within the assumptions of our coupled evolution model. To match the model with the ob-served occurrence rates within the uncertainty limits, a relatively large HEM efficiency factor, fHEM ≳ 0.45 is required. This estimate is only illustrative, since the model does not include a primordial short-period planet population formed or delivered during the protoplane-tary disk phase. It is challenging to estimate the true value of fHEM . As for the mechanism explored in this work – ZLK-driven migration with a stellar binary – a crude population-level estimate suggests a small HEM contribution. Roughly 50% of stars reside in multiple stellar systems (G. Duchˆ ene & A. Kraus 2013), and in our popula-tion synthesis only ∼10% of the initially drawn systems Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 19 satisfy the ZLK-timescale, and Roche-survival require-ments adopted for efficient HEM (see § 3.3). Combining these factors gives fHEM ∼ 0.05 (e.g. K. R. Anderson et al. 2016). However, there are other drivers of HEM, including planet–planet ZLK oscillations, planet–planet scattering, and secular chaos. Quantifying the combined efficiency of all such channels is nontrivial. Nevertheless, observational evidence suggests that HEM is a common formation channel. It is firmly es-tablished to be a major source of the hot Jupiter pop-ulation (D.-C. Chen et al. 2023; S. P. Schmidt & K. C. Schlaufman 2026), and the growing evidence is pointing to it being an important source of hot Neptunes as well (e.g. V. Bourrier et al. 2023, 2025; A. Castro-Gonz´ alez et al. 2026). Thus, while stellar-driven ZLK can only account for fHEM ∼ 0.05 and the total value including all channels is certainly less than 1, it still likely sums to a non-negligible fraction.  

> B.

INCLUDING TIDAL HEATING IN THE COUPLED EVOLUTION MODEL To explore the role of tidally induced radius inflation, we add tidal heating as an additional luminosity source in the entropy evolution equation (Eq. 1), 

dS dt = −L + Ltide 

R 

> conv

T dm . (B2) The tidal luminosity, Ltide , is defined as the rate at which orbital energy is dissipated as heat inside the planet (J. Leconte et al. 2010) 

Ltide = 2 K



Na(e) − N 2(e)Ω( e)



. (B3) This equation assumes zero planetary obliquity. Using Eq. B2 in place of the Eq. 1 in the coupled evolution model couples tidal heating directly to the planet’s ra-dius evolution. The resulting change in Rp then feeds back on both atmospheric mass loss and tidal migration. B.1. Runaway Inflation and Luminosity Cap 

If the tidal luminosity becomes comparable to or larger than the planet’s intrinsic cooling luminosity, 

Ltide ≳ L, the planet no longer simply cools and con-tracts. Instead, tidal heating increases the internal en-tropy and inflates the radius. This mechanism has been invoked to explain inflated, low-density sub-Neptunes and sub-Saturns (e.g., S. Millholland 2019; S. Millhol-land et al. 2020; L. Welbanks et al. 2024). Moreover, when tidal heating is coupled to HEM, it can produce a positive feedback (T. Hallatt & S. Mill-holland 2026a). This occurs if the dissipated energy is 10 1 10 2 10 3

Age [Myr]                          

> 010 20 30 40 50
> Sub-Neptune occurrence rate [%]
> Ltide, max = 10 26 erg s 1
> Ltide, max = 10 27 erg s 1
> Ltide, max = 10 28 erg s 1
> Figure 12. Sensitivity of the sub-Neptune occur-rence-rate evolution to the adopted tidal-luminosity cap. Green, orange, and purple curves show results for
> Ltide ,max = 10 26 ,10 27 ,and 10 28 ergs s −1, respectively.

efficiently deposited in the planet’s deep convective lay-ers, leading to radius inflation that further increases the tidal dissipation rate. This feedback is especially strong for sub-Neptune-mass planets. In some cases, the planet experiences runaway inflation and cannot retain a sta-ble envelope, and the atmosphere is rapidly lost, leaving behind a stripped core. This runaway inflation prob-lem was seen by T. Hallatt & S. Millholland (2026a,b). If this outcome was typical for HEM-delivered planets, sub-Neptunes would be efficiently converted into super-Earths, making sub-Neptunes rare even at young ages after the rapid HEM phase. This would be difficult to reconcile with the prevalence of young sub-Neptunes. Runaway inflation introduces a key uncertainty in tidal inflation modeling; the outcome depends not only on Ltide , but also on where the heat is deposited. If a large fraction of the heat is deposited in shallow ra-diative layers, it may be radiated away instead of being stored as internal entropy in the deep convective interior, reducing the degree of radius inflation (T. Hallatt & S. Millholland 2026a). While a more advanced treatment of tides is beyond the scope of this work, we avoid run-away inflation by adopting an ad hoc cap on the tidal lu-minosity, Ltide ,max = 10 28 ergs s −1 retained by the deep interior, Ltide ,eff = min( Ltide , L tide ,max ) ergs s −1, assum-ing that any tidal power above this value is deposited in shallower layers and radiated away. This cap is not in-tended to represent a definitive physical threshold, but allows us to explore the qualitative impact of moderate tidally induced radius inflation on the occurrence-rate 20 Sethi et. al. 

evolution without letting extreme runaway cases domi-nate the population. We tested the sensitivity of the results to this choice by repeating the calculation with Ltide ,max ∈{10 26 , 10 27 } erg s −1. The occurrence-rate evolution is basically converged once the cap, Ltide ,max ≳ 10 27 . Low-ering the cap to 10 26 erg s −1 weakens the early HEM driven rise, because reduced radius inflation leads to less efficient tidal dissipation and circularization. At later ages, however, the curves converge and the ∼Gyr age occurrence rates remain nearly unchanged. Thus, the adopted tidal-luminosity cap mainly affects the strength of the early HEM-driven rise rather than the long-term occurrence rate evolution. This sensitivity test is shown in Figure 12. REFERENCES 

Albrecht, S. H., Marcussen, M. L., Winn, J. N., Dawson, R. I., & Knudstrup, E. 2021, ApJL, 916, L1, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac0f03 Alexander, M. E. 1973, Ap&SS, 23, 459, doi: 10.1007/BF00645172 Anderson, K. R., Storch, N. I., & Lai, D. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 3671, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv2906 Arras, P., & Bildsten, L. 2006, ApJ, 650, 394, doi: 10.1086/506011 Baraffe, I., Selsis, F., Chabrier, G., et al. 2004, A&A, 419, L13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20040129 Barber, M. G., Mann, A. W., Vanderburg, A., Boyle, A. W., & Lopez Murillo, A. I. 2025, AJ, 170, 32, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/add7db Battley, M. P., Armstrong, D. J., & Pollacco, D. 2022, MNRAS, 511, 4285, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac278 Battley, M. P., Pollacco, D., & Armstrong, D. J. 2020, MNRAS, 496, 1197, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1626 Bean, J. L., Raymond, S. N., & Owen, J. E. 2021, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 126, e06639, doi: 10.1029/2020JE006639 Beaug´ e, C., & Nesvorn´ y, D. 2012, ApJ, 751, 119, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/751/2/119 Bergsten, G. J., Pascucci, I., Mulders, G. D., Fernandes, R. B., & Koskinen, T. T. 2022, AJ, 164, 190, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac8fea Bodenheimer, P., Lin, D. N. C., & Mardling, R. A. 2001, ApJ, 548, 466, doi: 10.1086/318667 Bolmont, E., Libert, A.-S., Leconte, J., & Selsis, F. 2016, A&A, 591, A106, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201628073 Bourrier, V., Attia, M., Mallonn, M., et al. 2023, A&A, 669, A63, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245004 Bourrier, V., Steiner, M., Castro-Gonz´ alez, A., et al. 2025, A&A, 701, A190, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202554856 Broome, M. I., Murray-Clay, R., McCann, J. R., & Owen, J. E. 2025, ApJ, 995, 198, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae14f4 Capistrant, B. K., Soares-Furtado, M., Vanderburg, A., et al. 2024, AJ, 167, 54, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad1039 Carroll, B. W., & Ostlie, D. A. 1996, An Introduction to Modern Astrophysics Castro-Gonz´ alez, A., Bourrier, V., Ehrenreich, D., et al. 2026, A&A, 709, L17, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202659558 Castro-Gonz´ alez, A., Bourrier, V., Lillo-Box, J., et al. 2024, A&A, 689, A250, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450957 Chatterjee, S., Ford, E. B., Matsumura, S., & Rasio, F. A. 2008, ApJ, 686, 580, doi: 10.1086/590227 Chen, D.-C., Xie, J.-W., Zhou, J.-L., et al. 2023, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 120, e2304179120, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2304179120 Chiang, E., & Laughlin, G. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 3444, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt424 Chontos, A., Murphy, J. M. A., MacDougall, M. G., et al. 2022, AJ, 163, 297, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac6266 Christiansen, J. L., Zink, J. K., Hardegree-Ullman, K. K., et al. 2023, AJ, 166, 248, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acf9f9 Cleveland, W. S., & Devlin, S. J. 1988, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 83, 596 David, T. J., Contardo, G., Sandoval, A., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 265, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abf439 Dressing, C. D., & Charbonneau, D. 2015, ApJ, 807, 45, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/807/1/45 Duchˆ ene, G., & Kraus, A. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 269, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081710-102602 Duquennoy, A., & Mayor, M. 1991, A&A, 248, 485 Eggleton, P. P., & Kiseleva-Eggleton, L. 2001, ApJ, 562, 1012, doi: 10.1086/323843 Erkaev, N. V., Kulikov, Y. N., Lammer, H., et al. 2007, A&A, 472, 329, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20066929 Fabrycky, D., & Tremaine, S. 2007, ApJ, 669, 1298, doi: 10.1086/521702 Fabrycky, D. C., Lissauer, J. J., Ragozzine, D., et al. 2014, ApJ, 790, 146, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/790/2/146 Faridani, T. H., Naoz, S., Wei, L., & Farr, W. M. 2022, ApJ, 932, 78, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6e38 Fausnaugh, M., Morgan, E., Vanderspek, R., et al. 2021, PASP, 133, 095002, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ac1d3f Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 21 

Feinstein, A. D., Montet, B. T., Ansdell, M., et al. 2020, AJ, 160, 219, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abac0a Fernandes, R. B., Hardegree-Ullman, K. K., Pascucci, I., et al. 2023, AJ, 166, 175, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acf4f0 Fernandes, R. B., Bergsten, G. J., Mulders, G. D., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 208, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adb97e Ford, E. B., Kozinsky, B., & Rasio, F. A. 2000, ApJ, 535, 385, doi: 10.1086/308815 Fortney, J. J., Marley, M. S., & Barnes, J. W. 2007, ApJ, 659, 1661, doi: 10.1086/512120 Fressin, F., Torres, G., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2013, ApJ, 766, 81, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/766/2/81 Friedman, J. H., Bentley, J. L., & Finkel, R. A. 1977, ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 3, 209 Fulton, B. J., Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 109, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa80eb Ginzburg, S., Schlichting, H. E., & Sari, R. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 759, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty290 Goldberg, M., & Petit, A. C. 2026, A&A, 707, A285, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202557562 G¨ udel, M., Guinan, E. F., & Skinner, S. L. 1997, ApJ, 483, 947, doi: 10.1086/304264 Gupta, A., & Schlichting, H. E. 2019, MNRAS, 487, 24, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1230 Hallatt, T., & Millholland, S. 2026a, ApJ, 997, 138, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae129d Hallatt, T., & Millholland, S. 2026b, ApJ, 997, 139, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adfb75 Holman, M., Touma, J., & Tremaine, S. 1997, Nature, 386, 254, doi: 10.1038/386254a0 Howard, A. W., Marcy, G. W., Bryson, S. T., et al. 2012, ApJS, 201, 15, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/201/2/15 Hut, P. 1980, A&A, 92, 167 Hut, P. 1981, A&A, 99, 126 Im, H., Lu, T., Rice, M., et al. 2026, ApJ, 1003, 84, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae606b Izidoro, A., Bitsch, B., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2021, A&A, 650, A152, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935336 Izidoro, A., Ogihara, M., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 1750, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1232 Jackson, A. P., Davis, T. A., & Wheatley, P. J. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 2024, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20657.x Jackson, B., Greenberg, R., & Barnes, R. 2008, ApJ, 681, 1631, doi: 10.1086/587641 Johnstone, C. P., Bartel, M., & G¨ udel, M. 2021, A&A, 649, A96, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038407 Kippenhahn, R., & Weigert, A. 1990, Stellar Structure and Evolution Knudstrup, E., Albrecht, S. H., Winn, J. N., et al. 2024, A&A, 690, A379, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450627 Kozai, Y. 1962, AJ, 67, 591, doi: 10.1086/108790 Lammer, H., Selsis, F., Ribas, I., et al. 2003, ApJL, 598, L121, doi: 10.1086/380815 Leconte, J., Chabrier, G., Baraffe, I., & Levrard, B. 2010, A&A, 516, A64, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201014337 Lee, E. J., & Connors, N. J. 2021, ApJ, 908, 32, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd6c7 Levrard, B., Correia, A. C. M., Chabrier, G., et al. 2007, A&A, 462, L5, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20066487 Lidov, M. L. 1962, Planet. Space Sci., 9, 719, doi: 10.1016/0032-0633(62)90129-0 Lissauer, J. J., Ragozzine, D., Fabrycky, D. C., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 8, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/197/1/8 Liu, B., Mu˜ noz, D. J., & Lai, D. 2015, MNRAS, 447, 747, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2396 Lopez, E. D., & Fortney, J. J. 2013, ApJ, 776, 2, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/776/1/2 Lopez, E. D., & Fortney, J. J. 2014, ApJ, 792, 1, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/1 Lopez, E. D., Fortney, J. J., & Miller, N. 2012, ApJ, 761, 59, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/761/1/59 Lu, T., An, Q., Li, G., et al. 2025, ApJ, 979, 218, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9b79 Luque, R., & Pall´ e, E. 2022, Science, 377, 1211, doi: 10.1126/science.abl7164 Mamajek, E. E., & Hillenbrand, L. A. 2008, ApJ, 687, 1264, doi: 10.1086/591785 Mardling, R. A., & Aarseth, S. J. 2001, MNRAS, 321, 398, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.03974.x Markham, S., Guillot, T., & Stevenson, D. 2022, A&A, 665, A12, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243359 Marzari, F., & Weidenschilling, S. J. 2002, Icarus, 156, 570, doi: 10.1006/icar.2001.6786 Mazeh, T., Holczer, T., & Faigler, S. 2016, A&A, 589, A75, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201528065 Miller, M. C., & Hamilton, D. P. 2002, ApJ, 576, 894, doi: 10.1086/341788 Miller, N., Fortney, J. J., & Jackson, B. 2009, ApJ, 702, 1413, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/702/2/1413 Millholland, S. 2019, ApJ, 886, 72, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4c3f Millholland, S., Petigura, E., & Batygin, K. 2020, ApJ, 897, 7, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab959c Millholland, S., Wang, S., & Laughlin, G. 2017, ApJL, 849, L33, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa9714 Misener, W., & Schlichting, H. E. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 5658, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab895 22 Sethi et. al. 

Mu˜ noz, D. J., Lai, D., & Liu, B. 2016, MNRAS, 460, 1086, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw983 Murray, C. D., & Dermott, S. F. 1999, Solar System Dynamics, doi: 10.1017/CBO9781139174817 Namekata, K., Toriumi, S., Airapetian, V. S., et al. 2023, ApJ, 945, 147, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acbe38 Naoz, S. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 441, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081915-023315 Newton, E. R., Mann, A. W., Tofflemire, B. M., et al. 2019, ApJL, 880, L17, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab2988 Newton, E. R., Mann, A. W., Kraus, A. L., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 65, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abccc6 Ogihara, M., Morbidelli, A., & Guillot, T. 2015, A&A, 578, A36, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201525884 Owen, J. E. 2019, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 47, 67, doi: 10.1146/annurev-earth-053018-060246 Owen, J. E., & Jackson, A. P. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 2931, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21481.x Owen, J. E., & Schlichting, H. E. 2024, MNRAS, 528, 1615, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3972 Owen, J. E., & Wu, Y. 2013, ApJ, 775, 105, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/775/2/105 Owen, J. E., & Wu, Y. 2016, ApJ, 817, 107, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/817/2/107 Owen, J. E., & Wu, Y. 2017, ApJ, 847, 29, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa890a Parc, L., Bouchy, F., Venturini, J., Dorn, C., & Helled, R. 2024, A&A, 688, A59, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202449911 Petigura, E. A., Marcy, G. W., & Howard, A. W. 2013, ApJ, 770, 69, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/770/1/69 Petigura, E. A., Marcy, G. W., Winn, J. N., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 89, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaa54c Petrovich, C., & Bhaskar, H. G. 2026, ApJL, 1007, L38, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae909d Puranam, A., & Batygin, K. 2018, AJ, 155, 157, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aab09f Quirrenbach, A. 2022, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 6, 56, doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/ac5f0d Raghavan, D., McAlister, H. A., Henry, T. J., et al. 2010, ApJS, 190, 1, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/190/1/1 Rasio, F. A., & Ford, E. B. 1996, Science, 274, 954, doi: 10.1126/science.274.5289.954 Ribas, I., Guinan, E. F., G¨ udel, M., & Audard, M. 2005, ApJ, 622, 680, doi: 10.1086/427977 Rogers, J. G., & Owen, J. E. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 1526, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab529 Rogers, J. G., Owen, J. E., & Schlichting, H. E. 2024, MNRAS, 529, 2716, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae563 Rowe, J. F., Bryson, S. T., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2014, ApJ, 784, 45, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/784/1/45 Schmidt, S. P., & Schlaufman, K. C. 2026, AJ, 171, 157, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae3c11 Sethi, R., MacLeod, M., & Millholland, S. 2026a, ApJ, 1008, 11, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae9155 Sethi, R., & Martin, D. V. 2024, MNRAS, 529, 4442, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae717 Sethi, R., & Millholland, S. C. 2025, ApJ, 988, 247, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade883 Sethi, R., Martin, D. V., Barker, A. J., et al. 2026b, MNRAS, 547, stag454, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag454 Shematovich, V. I., Ionov, D. E., & Lammer, H. 2014, A&A, 571, A94, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201423573 Szab´ o, G. M., & Kiss, L. L. 2011, ApJL, 727, L44, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/727/2/L44 Takeda, G., Kita, R., & Rasio, F. A. 2008, ApJ, 683, 1063, doi: 10.1086/589852 Tamayo, D., Cranmer, M., Hadden, S., et al. 2020, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 117, 18194, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2001258117 Tang, Y., Fortney, J. J., & Murray-Clay, R. 2024, ApJ, 976, 221, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad8567 Tittemore, W. C., & Wisdom, J. 1990, Icarus, 85, 394, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(90)90125-S Tofflemire, B. M., Rizzuto, A. C., Newton, E. R., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 171, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abdf53 Tu, L., Johnstone, C. P., G¨ udel, M., & Lammer, H. 2015, A&A, 577, L3, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201526146 Vach, S., Zhou, G., Huang, C. X., et al. 2024, AJ, 167, 210, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad3108 Van Eylen, V., Agentoft, C., Lundkvist, M. S., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 4786, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1783 Vick, M., Lai, D., & Anderson, K. R. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 5645, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz354 von Zeipel, H. 1910, Astronomische Nachrichten, 183, 345, doi: 10.1002/asna.19091832202 Watson, A. J., Donahue, T. M., & Walker, J. C. G. 1981, Icarus, 48, 150, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(81)90101-9 Wei, L., Naoz, S., Faridani, T., & Farr, W. M. 2021, ApJ, 923, 118, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac2c70 Weiss, L. M., Marcy, G. W., Petigura, E. A., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 48, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa9ff6 Welbanks, L., Bell, T. J., Beatty, T. G., et al. 2024, Nature, 630, 836, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07514-w Weldon, G. C., Yee, S. W., Hansen, B. M. S., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2607.01315, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.01315 Williams, D. M., & Pollard, D. 2002, International Journal of Astrobiology, 1, 61, doi: 10.1017/S1473550402001064 Occurrence Rates of Close-in Sub-Neptunes 23 

Wright, N. J., Drake, J. J., Mamajek, E. E., & Henry, G. W. 2011, ApJ, 743, 48, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/743/1/48 Wu, Y. 2019, ApJ, 874, 91, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab06f8 Wu, Y., & Lithwick, Y. 2011, ApJ, 735, 109, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/735/2/109 Wu, Y., & Murray, N. 2003, ApJ, 589, 605, doi: 10.1086/374598 Yu, H., & Dai, F. 2024, ApJ, 972, 159, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad5ffb Zanazzi, J. J., MacLeod, M., Bryan, M. L., & Mahadevan, S. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2606.20789, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.20789 Zhang, K., & Hamilton, D. P. 2008, Icarus, 193, 267, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2007.08.024 Zhu, W., Petrovich, C., Wu, Y., Dong, S., & Xie, J. 2018, ApJ, 860, 101, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac6d5