Title: From Grey-Box to Green-Box: When can Physics-Informed Machine Learning Reduce Carbon Footprints in Structural Health Monitoring?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.33387v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 01:58:02 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
# From Grey-Box to Green-Box: When can Physics-Informed Machine Learning Reduce Carbon Footprints in Structural Health Monitoring? 

Daisy R. Bradley 1, Nathan A. Hinchliffe 1, Daniel J. Pitchforth 1, Matthew R. Jones 1, and Elizabeth J. Cross 11Dynamics Research Group, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK, e-mail: dbradley2@sheffield.ac.uk September 29, 2026 

# 1 Abstract 

Machine learning plays an increasingly vital role in engineering, but the corresponding increase in compute time is not without environmental cost. Physics-informed machine learning or “grey-box” models have been developed to overcome some of the limitations of traditional black-box learners, utilising the physical insight that an engineer would have about the structure they are modelling and have shown promising results in the structural engineering field among many others. This work explores whether an additional advantage could be a reduced environmental impact, considering the relationship between training data quantity and training time, linking this duration to carbon emissions from computing. In a structural health monitoring context, four physics-informed machine learning ap-proaches — spanning Gaussian processes and neural networks — are evaluated: residual modelling, input augmentation, hybrid modelling, and constrained learning. The emis-sions for training each of the models to reach a given error threshold is compared, and in most examples, shown to be lower for the physics-informed models (with input augmented models being an exception). This reduction in training emissions further compounds the environmental savings achieved by collecting and storing less data. Although promising results, we cannot expect a silver bullet and the case studies demonstrate that a trade-off is needed between the increased complexity that comes from introducing physics into a machine learner, against the gain from reduced training data requirements. 

# 2 Introduction 

Within the engineering community, our use of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelli-gence (AI) is significantly increasing, leading to a corresponding rise in the energy demand from our computing. This comes with wide ranging and well documented environmen-tal impacts, including increased carbon emissions. So far, however, there has been little consideration of how this will accelerate further as we increase our use of these tools in a professional context, particularly where we might expect considerable interplay between AI and other approaches with a heavy computational burden, such as computation fluid dynamics (CDF) or finite element analysis (FEA). With the main AI providers not cur-rently required to share their energy and water use, barriers to quantifying and projecting 1arXiv:2609.33387v1 [cs.LG] 27 Sep 2026 this impact are large. However, regardless, there are steps we can take as engineers to mitigate the potential impact. Within the broad remit of our AI use, this work considers the impact of machine learning models used for inference in an engineering or scientific context (e.g. for prediction of key structural response variables). Following a growing interest in physics-informed machine learning, and noticing its benefits in particular in reducing the burden on training data [1], we introduce and ask the question here as to whether embedding physics directly into a machine learning model could help to reduce its environmental impact. In this paper we will explore when this may or may not hold true with examples from regression challenges in structural health monitoring (SHM) (an area where physics-informed models have been shown to outperform their black-box counterparts). Our particular focus is on the relationship between training data quantity and train-ing time, linking this duration to carbon emissions from computing, and exploring the hypothesis that reducing training data requirements reduces the environmental impact of a model via shorter training duration. We also consider the carbon cost of collecting and storing additional training data. Physics-Informed Machine Learning (PIML) — also known by several variant names [2, 3] — offers different ways to embed physical knowledge into a model 1. To evaluate when this improves model sustainability, we explore a range of PIML approaches with varying degrees of embedded physics. We will employ neural networks (NNs), but pre-dominantly Gaussian Processes (GP) as regression methods in our comparisons. Although GPs are known to be slow because of their O(N 3) computational overhead (without sparse approximation methods), they offer a means to embed different levels of physical insight within the same mathematical framework. This provides a baseline model for compari-son, allowing us to evaluate how incorporating physics impacts model cost. Explicitly, we will consider residual modelling , where the black-box component accounts for un-modelled behaviour in the physics component, input augmentation , where we adapt input variables to account for known physics before feeding them into a black-box regressor, hybrid mod-els , where the explanatory power is shared more equally between the physics and data components (here through GP kernel design), and finally constrained learners , where the black-box learner is dominant in the model but restricted by physical constraints. Throughout, a common theme will be the consideration that in many engineering applications, we have some idea of the required level of performance - how good is good enough? This work is the first to draw comparisons between “grey-box” and black-box models through an environmental lens in the pursuit of “green-box” models which meet the required performance with minimal environmental impact. 

# 3 Context and literature 

The world has now entered into the “Age of Artificial Intelligence”, where AI has gone from an abstract concept to something that many of us use on a daily basis. Within both industry and academia, AI tools are being heartily adopted and deployed, and while this has brought about astonishing advancements across many sectors [4], the detrimental impact to the environment cannot be ignored. Datacenters used to power AI cause many environmental concerns [5], ranging from the toxic runoff from the extraction of rare earth elements [6] to manufacture graphics processing units (GPUs), the embodied carbon within the hardware itself [7], and the significant amounts of water lost for evaporative cooling of datacenters in water-stressed areas [8]. The energy used to power these datacenters is already significant, estimated at 415 TWh in 2024, and predictions from the International 

> 1Note that we will often refer to models which are purely data-driven as black-box, those that are purely physical as white-box, and those in-between as grey-box

2Energy Association suggest that this could rise to 945 TWh by 2030 - which is comparable to the annual electricity consumption of the continent of Africa [5] - which would create a predicted 320 Mt of carbon dioxide [9]. Machine learning methods are a subset of AI which learn patterns from data, and are commonly used within engineering and computer science. Concerns around the impact of AI have given rise to a new field of researchers focusing on sustainable ML, where it is well recognised that accurate measurement of computational carbon footprints is a prerequi-site for emissions reduction [10]. Numerous software frameworks have been developed to quantify computing energy usage which can be divided into those which use static estima-tion techniques that rely on fixed baseline assumptions, and dynamic estimation methods that capture real-time usage data from central processing units (CPUs) and GPUs [11]. Prominent static tools include the Machine Learning Emissions Calculator (MLCO2) [12], whereas utilities such as CodeCarbon [13] and eco2AI [14] represent dynamic tracking implementations. Although these tools are extensively integrated into green computing research, comparative benchmark studies evaluating them against physical power meters reveal notable variance and a systematic tendency to under-report emissions [15, 11]. Nevertheless, applying a chosen tracking methodology consistently provides a valid base-line for relative comparison, guiding more environmentally conscious model design and deployment decisions. In terms of actually reducing the footprint of ML, there is extensive work in the lit-erature on increasing the efficiency of ML models, although not generally with a view to reducing emissions. In Menghani’s 2023 review, the author categorises efficient techniques into five focus areas: compression techniques, learning techniques, automation, efficient ar-chitectures, and infrastructure and hardware [16]. Some of the most successful techniques include pruning, quantisation, and mixture of expert (MoE) architectures. Pruning is a compression technique which has been successful at downsizing ML models without com-promising performance; in one study, the total number of parameters was reduced by a factor of 13 with no loss of accuracy [17]. Quantisation is another popular compression technique which has successfully reduced both inference time and storage requirements by reducing the precision used in neural network model [18]. In several instances, the quantised model shows negligible accuracy loss compared to the uncompressed model [19]. The efficient MoE architecture has been widely adopted, with one of the most famous examples being the DeepSeek-V3 model [20]. This was built on the DeepSeekMoE ar-chitecture, which achieves comparable performance to LLaMA2 7B with only 40% of its computations [21]. These developments showcase a small subset of the ongoing work in the field of efficient ML. However, Jevons’ paradox states that as technology makes resource use more efficient, total consumption of that resource increases rather than decreases [22]. To avoid this being the case for ML, it is imperative that we keep the broader context of sustainability at the forefront of research and development. Again, although not necessarily for environmental reasons, considerable research has focused on enhancing the computational efficiency of traditional numerical models in en-gineering settings. Reduced order methods (ROMs) significantly lessen the computational burden in time-critical applications such as real-time control, structural dynamics, and digital twins [23, 24]. Alternatively, surrogate modelling using statistical methods (e.g. GPs again!) offers a data-driven approach to approximate high-fidelity, computationally expensive simulations [25, 26]. As engineers, we usually work in environments where we have both data (real or simulated) and a physical understanding of the system we are modelling, which can be combined. As we move towards incorporating physics knowledge into ML, we have the po-tential to increase our sustainability even more by combining both efficient ML techniques and efficient numerical techniques to reduce our computational demand. 3PIML is the subcategory of ML where physical knowledge is integrated into the models to form so-called “grey-box” models. Some of the benefits of grey-box models compared to their black-box counterparts include increased generalisation, efficiency and interpretabil-ity [27]. In an SHM context, grey-box models have been shown to outperform black-box models in situations where training data does not span all environmental and operational conditions (EOCs) [28]. Here, the relationship between physics input and training data requirements will be further explored and directly linked to environmental impact. Of the numerous available methods for PIML [27], physics-informed neural networks (PINNs) remain the most widely adopted, integrating physical principles by incorporating the residual from known differential equations directly into the loss function. Against our hypothesis, existing literature demonstrates that introducing physics into the loss of a neural network increases computational burden. For example, in [29], black-box NNs are compared to PINNs to accelerate power system time-domain dynamic simulations. While both ML methods were shown to be faster than a traditional numerical solver, the up-front training cost per epoch were higher for the PINN due to evaluating the physics loss term. [30] also find the computational cost of PINNs to be higher than traditional NN solvers in the context of immune system response modelling, due to the repeated evaluation of differential operators. Compounding these raw computational costs, PINNs frequently suffer gradient “pathologies” (e.g. vanishing gradients) during optimisation [31], leading to slow convergence and further inflating total training time and energy consumption. Noting these results, and not wishing to add to the further proliferation of PINNs, this paper will focus on other PIML methods which have not yet been explored in terms of their computational cost. 

3.1 Our Approach 

The hypothesis we are interested in exploring is can embedding physics in your machine learner help you to reduce emissions? We have already read how physics in the loss of a PINN can certainly do the opposite. Here we more broadly consider a range of PIML methods, where physical insight/models have varying strengths in the inference. Many of the examples are drawn from the work of the authors and rely heavily on a Gaussian process framework to introduce physical insight in different ways. The models are developed for the purposes of SHM, where the main gains that we have seen from PIML is a reduction in the need for training data covering the whole operational span of a structure, or from all different environmental conditions [28]. In this work we will explore how the gains you can make from reducing your data requirements (which here we refer to as coverage ) do or do not also reduce emissions when training the model. For each test case presented we will show how the model error changes with coverage and how the runtime of that model is affected. We will explore our hypothesis by investigating five PIML techniques - ordered in terms how dominant the physics component is - from most to least: 

• Residual modelling: a physical model is employed, with a machine learner accounting for the error between the prediction of the physical model and the target. Here (Section 5) we use a zero mean Gaussian process with an squared exponential (SE) kernel, and in comparison, a multi-layer perceptron. 

• Input augmentation: adapting the inputs to the model to, for example, obey physical laws. In Section 6 we apply the same GPs and NNs as above, with and without the ‘manufactured’ inputs. 

• Hybrid modelling through the GP kernel: Here we bring our knowledge in through adapting the kernel/covariance function that dictates how our functions behave. In 4this work (Sections 7 and 8) we consider two kernel designs, one that can switch between different physical states. 

• Constrained GPs: At the blackest end of the grey-box spectrum, here (Section 9) we take advantage of a sparse approximation that allows us to embed the known boundaries of the problem into the covariance function. 

Caveats: In this initial work we are investigating the examples where we have seen performance gain by introducing physics. The implicit assumption we have made is that if physics does not prove to be useful in terms of performance then it will not help reduce emissions. The second caveat here is that for this initial work, we are exploring our hypothesis with what would be considered very small datasets in a deep learning context - this will be discussed further in later sections. In the remainder of the paper Section 4 will introduce the specific models we will consider, along with implementation details. The results of each of the methods considered are presented in Sections 5-9, while Section 10 concludes the paper and outlines directions for future work. As we go through the case studies, we will explore our initial expectation that increasing the contribution of the physical component in the machine learner should in turn decrease the computational burden. 

# 4 Methods 

4.1 Models 

In this work, both GPs and NNs are used as black-box models. Readers are referred to [32] for a detailed explanation of GP methods, and to [33] for NNs. The primary model here is a GP, as it allows us to easily embed varying levels of physical insight to explore our hypothesis. During inference in the GP, the model is updated via Equations 1 and 2, where 

K(X, X ) is the covariance matrix for the training inputs, K(X∗, X ) the covariance matrix of the testing and training inputs, and K(X∗, X ∗) the covariance of the testing inputs, and σn is a noise hyper-parameter. 

E[f ∗] = K(X∗, X )[ K(X, X ) + σ2

> n

I]−1y (1) 

V[f∗] = K(X∗, X ∗) − K(X∗, X )[ K(X, X ) + σ2

> n

I]−1K(X, X ∗) (2) GP hyperparameters are learned through optimisation of the negative marginal log likelihood. The optimiser used here varies depending on the case study (as will be high-lighted), and is achieved via gradient descent or quantum particle swarm optimisation. Physics can be integrated into a GP through both its mean and covariance (kernel) functions. Residual modelling, for example, incorporates a non-zero prior mean func-tion. While many kernel functions exist for GPs (see [34]), standard black-box modelling typically combines a zero mean with the SE kernel shown in Equation 3. 

kSE (x, x ′) = σ2exp (− (x − x′)2

2l2 ) (3) Kernel selection can be guided by known system behaviours, such as smoothness or periodicity— an approach termed physics-informed kernel selection. Furthermore, hy-perparameters can be bounded or fixed to reflect these behaviours, reducing the search space to optimise. Kernels can also be combined to embed domain knowledge, such as the switching kernels from [35] explored in Section 8. GPs can also be constrained to comply with physical laws or assumptions — for instance, enforcing non-negativity through the 5GP prior [36] or monotonicity using virtual derivative observations with a probit likelihood function [37]. Constrained GPs in acoustic emission mapping [38] serve as a case study in Section 9. The black-box NN used in this work is a multilayer perceptron (MLP) with 3 hid-den layers, 64 neurons per layer, and three ReLu activation functions. Optimisation uses ADAM [39] with a maximum training budget of 1000 epochs and an early stopping trig-gered if the validation performance fails to improve by at least 10 −5 for 20 consecutive epochs. For all models in this paper, a normalised mean squared error (NMSE) is used to measure performance, as defined by Equation 4. 

N M SE = 100Σ( y − y∗)2

nσ (4) where y represents the true values, y∗ the predicted values, n is the number of data points in the testing set and σ the variance of the true values. Throughout, we will take consideration that, as engineers, we may have an idea of the level of performance the model must achieve to be useful in a particular context, in some examples we will use this as a threshold, through which we can then compare performance. 

4.2 Model Carbon Emissions 

The methodology used to approximate the carbon emissions of the models closely follows the methodology used by CodeCarbon [13]. In each test case, the model is run purely on a CPU, with the CPU approximated to be operating at 50% of its thermal design power (TDP). The power associated with random access memory (RAM) is based on the number of modules in the workstation, with 32 GB of RAM (the capacity of all workstations used in this study) estimated to use 20 W [13]. Equation 5 shows how these constant power estimations lead to energy scaling linearly with time. 

Etotal = t(0 .5T DP + 20) (5) As all models were run in the UK, a carbon intensity value of 237.589 gCO 2eq/kW h 

was used to convert from energy into emissions [40]. To allow for comparisons between models run on different workstations, and due to the linear relationship between time and emissions, discussions will be framed in terms of run time. An additional consideration is the carbon cost of collecting and storing training data. Data collection ranges from little to significant carbon cost, depending on the the problem. For example, while pre-existing bridge sensors carry an embedded carbon cost from their manufacturing and installation, collecting data from them incurs virtually no additional operational emissions. In contrast, gathering aircraft data may require dedicated flights, generating operational emissions that easily dwarf those from training the model itself. While it is impossible to quantify the carbon cost of data collection in a generic case, it is something that we must keep in mind when considering our ML modelling. The carbon cost of data storage is also difficult to quantify, as it depends heavily on whether storage is local or cloud-based, and if it is stored in a data center, the efficiency and energy source of the data center. [41] estimates that transmitting and storing data in a data center requires 3-7 kWh per GB, and that storing 100 GB of data for a year costs approximately 0.2 tons of CO 2. Though this estimation is very loose, it highlights that the carbon cost of data storage can be significant, especially for the vast datasets used in SHM, as explored in [42]. The next section of this paper will consider residual modelling as our first PIML example, where we will compare a residual model against a black-box model for both NNs 6and GPs, and explore the relationship between physics input, training data, performance, and emissions. 

# 5 Residual Modelling 

Residual models are a PIML method at the whiter end of the spectrum with physics playing the most dominant role, where a physics-based or “white-box” model is first implemented to capture the known relationships within the data. The white-box model output is then subtracted from the observed data to give a residual, which is then used as a target for a data driven model. In engineering, we often understand some underlying physics of our system, making residual modelling a good candidate for many applications. The models used in this case study were developed based on the work in [43] to predict longitudinal deck deflections of the Tamar bridge, as this can be used as a performance indicator [44]. The changes in deck deflection are driven by a number of factors, pre-dominately temperature, wind conditions and traffic load. The available data spans from September to January, therefore capturing both daily fluctuations and the seasonal tem-perature change. As it is known that stay cables expand linearly with temperature [45], a linear model was fit to the first 500 temperature and deflection data points to serve as the physics component. For the grey-box models, a GP or a neural network was then used to learn the residual between the prediction of the physics component and the measured deflection. The black-box models simply learned the relationships between input and out-put data directly; here, the GP has been restricted to a temperature only input, while the neural network has inputs of temperature, traffic loading and wind speed. The restriction on the GP is because the black-box GP model showed poor performance when learning the problem with all three inputs, hence why temperature was used alone, allowing for a fair comparison with the grey-box GP. Both models use ADAM optimisation to learn the hyperparameters. This model was established to explore how useful the grey-box approach is in the case of data available for model training. It is often the case that data for a monitoring system are available only for a fixed time, and will not cover all operational/environmental conditions that a structure will see in its life time. Here we explore the performance of the models with different training periods - which in this case relates to different coverage of the environmental conditions. The data reflect a time when the weather is getting progressively colder, so models trained on only, say the first 10% of the data, are required to extrapolate into the colder temperatures - this is where the linear physics increases the grey-box performance. In terms of the impact of establishing the models, we expect that the ability to work with less training data should lead to reduced training time and therefore emissions , as well as those from the collection and storage of data. For the results here, the data were split into 10% coverage increments temporally. Training data were increased by adding 10% increments until full coverage was reached. Within the training coverage area, the GPs used a 50/50 train/test split the NNs used a 50/15/35 train/validation/test split. The training times reported for this study do not include the time to train the linear model, as it is only run once as a pre-processing step prior to model training, and was not repeated for each coverage increment. 

5.1 Results and Discussion 

Figure 1 shows the results for the black-box and grey-box GP models, comparing them in terms of NMSE and training time, against increasing coverage of training data, while Figure 2 shows the same for the NN models. As the black-box models cannot extrapolate, they were expected to perform poorly at 720 40 60 80 100 010 20 30 40 50 60 70  

> Black-Box Grey-Box Training data coverage (%) NMSE

(a) NMSE 20 40 60 80 100 510 15 20 25 Black-Box Grey-Box Training data coverage (%) Training time (s)  (b) Training Time 

Figure 1: The NMSE and training time results for the GP case study, showing the per-formance of the black-box and residual models. 20 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 120  

> Black-Box Grey-Box Training data coverage (%) NMSE

(a) NMSE 20 40 60 80 100 2.4 2.6 2.8 33.2 3.4 3.6 Black-Box Grey-Box Training data coverage (%) Training time (s)  (b) Training Time 

Figure 2: The NMSE and training time results for the NN case study, showing the per-formance of the black-box and residual models. low training data coverage, where training data is from September/October, excluding the cold temperatures seen in December/January, as can be seen in Figures 1a and 2a. The grey-box models will outperform the black-box models in these training data regimes, as the linear physics allows for extrapolation to cooler temperatures, although, as expected, we see a performance levelling between the two models as training data coverage increases and cooler temperatures are included in the training data. While the NN models follow this expected behaviour, as shown in Figure 2a, Figure 1a shows the black-box outper-forming the grey-box at medium coverage (40-60%). This suggests that the physics-based linear model does not totally encompass the relationship between temperature and deflec-tion, which is supported by Figure 3, which plots the displacement of the deck against temperature and shows the linear model fit to the data. Another consideration is that we have removed the simple-to-learn linear relationship from the observed data, meaning that the residual model may have a more complex relationship to learn, such that in this medium coverage range, the grey-box GP struggles to perform. When comparing the run times of the models (and noting that they are small due rel-atively small dataset), we can see the expected behaviour of these increasing with training data size. Loosely we’d expect the GP to scale cubically with training data size, and the neural network to scale linearly. In terms of making a comparison between them in terms of emissions, we consider different NMSE thresholds - to compare the emissions between the models when they are 80 5 10 15 282.34 282.36 282.38 282.4 282.42 282.44 282.46 Real Data Linear Fit Temperature (°C) Displacement (mm) Figure 3: The linear model fit to the Tamar bridge deflection data, showing that the linear model does not fully capture the relationship between temperature and deflection. required to hit a pre-determined level of fidelity. Unlike the NN case, where the grey-box model would reach any NMSE threshold set with less training data than the black-box, our NMSE threshold affects which model is more effective in the GP case. If we take a threshold of NMSE <10, the grey-box GP model reaches this with 70% coverage, as opposed to 30% coverage for the black-box, which leads to a 38.7% increase in carbon emissions from training (0.31 gCO 2e for the black-box vs 0.43 gCO 2e for the grey-box). However, a threshold of NMSE <30 sees the grey-box model reach this with only 10% coverage, giving a 50.0% reduction in carbon emissions compared to the black-box, which requires 30% coverage to reach the same performance (0.06 gCO 2e for the grey-box vs 0.12 gCO 2e for the black-box). This demonstrates the importance of deciding what performance is “good enough” as early as possible, making sure we only collect, store and use as much data as we need, and allowing us to decide the most appropriate model for our needs. Considering Figure 1b, we can see that the training time for the two GP models is nearly identical, as expected considering the models have the same hyperparameter count and a similar problem complexity. In some cases, there is a trade off between hyperparam-eter count and training data requirements when introducing physics (see Sections 7 and 8 for examples) however, in this study there is no run time penalty from adding physics, so any training data reduction will reduce training emissions. Similar closely matched train-ing times can be seen in Figure 2b, though in this case, the times are fast enough that carbon savings from model training would be minimal. For example, an NMSE threshold of <30 sees a 10.7% reduction in emissions, even though the grey-box model needs less than half of the training coverage of the black-box, which equates to a saving of 0.009 gCO 2e. Nonetheless, in both cases, collecting and storing less data will reduce the overall carbon impact of the models. This case study has shown that residual models can outperform black-box models, especially in regions of low training data coverage, which can lead to reduced training time and therefore emissions from training, as well as those from the collection and storage of data, when less training data is required to reach a given performance threshold. While these results are promising, it is important to note that the performance of a residual model is highly dependent on the ability of a physics-based model to capture underlying relationships in the data, though there are many cases where our engineering knowledge makes this possible. In the following section, we will explore input augmentation, where we are less sure of the expected outcome. 96 Input Augmentation 

Input augmentation involves preprocessing our data, often translating from raw sensor data into more meaningful physical quantities, before using these as the inputs to a data-driven model. These physics-based augmentations can simplify the ML problem if the new inputs have simpler relationships to the target, potentially reducing the run times requirements for “good” model performance, leading to carbon savings for the model. This input augmentation case study was inspired by the work of [46, 47], in which the authors modify sensor data using known physical relationships of an in-service aircraft and use these as model inputs to predict wing strain, using a NN and a GP respectively. In this study, a black-box and grey-box version of both a NN and GP are constructed and compared, with architectures described in Section 4.1, and with the inputs differen-tiating the black-box and grey-box models. The GP models use a limited-memory Broy-den–Fletcher–Goldfarb–Shanno (L-BFGS) optimiser to learn the hyperparameters, while the NN models use ADAM optimisation. To provide input for the black-box models, the raw data from the 7 sensor channels were used. These same 7 channels were augmented to create inputs for the grey-box models, which includes using Newton’s second law of motion to convert accelerations into forces with total aircraft mass, dynamic pressure calculated from the indicated airspeed and the air density (derived from the barostatic altitude) as in [48], and the directional accelerations calculated based on aircraft specific formulae. The complete set of inputs for each model are shown in Table 1. Table 1: Black-box and Grey-box model inputs for the prediction of the strain measured on an aircraft wing during flight Black-Box Inputs Grey-Box Inputs Normal acceleration at the CG Normal force at the CG Lateral acceleration at the CG Lateral force at the CG Normal acceleration at the empennage Pitch acceleration Normal acceleration at the port wing Roll acceleration Indicated airspeed Dynamic pressure Barostatic altitude Remaining fuel mass 

6.1 Results and Discussion 

Figure 4 shows the black-box and grey-box GP models’ performance and training time results with different training data quantities. Figure 5 shows the same results for the NN models. Firstly considering the GP results, shown in Figure 4, we can see that the black-box has a lower NMSE than the grey-box model at low training data ( <500 points), before the performance of the black-box model deteriorates while the grey-box remains consistent around an NMSE of 5. This is likely due to overfitting, where the black-box model learns the training data well but fails to generalise to unseen data - a phenomenon that is less likely to occur in physics-informed models. As both models perform well with minimal data, using a performance threshold yields no emissions savings for the grey-box model. However, the consistency of the grey-box model must be taken into account, as it is more reliable and less sensitive to training data quantity. Figure 4b shows that the models take a similar amount of time to train, which is expected as the GP models have the same architecture as each other, using one overall lengthscale rather than one per dimension. 10 0 500 1000 1500 2000 56789 

> Black-Box Grey-Box Training data quantity NMSE

(a) NMSE 0 500 1000 1500 2000 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 Black-Box Grey-Box Training data quantity Training time (s)  (b) Time 

Figure 4: The NMSE and training time results for the GP input augmentation case study, showing the performance of the black-box and grey-box models. 0 500 1000 1500 2000 55.1 5.2 5.3 5.4 5.5 5.6 5.7 5.8 Black-Box Grey-Box Training data quantity NMSE 

(a) NMSE 0 500 1000 1500 2000 246810 12 14   

> Black-Box Grey-Box Training data quantity Training time (s)

(b) Time 

Figure 5: The NMSE and training time results for the NN input augmentation case study, showing the performance of the black-box and grey-box models. The NN results, shown in Figure 5, reinforce the notion that input augmentation will not make a carbon saving in this instance. The models perform similarly, with the black-box model slightly outperforming the grey-box model across all training data quantities. The training time for the grey-box model is slightly shorter, meaning a small carbon saving could be made here, but the difference is not significant. The reason why input augmentation does not lead to performance gains in this case study is twofold. Firstly, some of the black-box inputs show a close to linear relationship with strain, such that the black-box problem is already simple to learn before augmenta-tion. On the other hand, while there is a linear relationship between normal force at the CG and strain, the other grey-box inputs do not show a clear correlation with the target, meaning they do not necessary simplify the problem. It is important to be aware that there may be times where the data-driven model is the best suited to the task, in terms of performance and carbon footprint. With that said, this is case specific, and in other cases where input augmentation simplifies the relationship between inputs and outputs, input augmentation may lead to carbon savings. In this case, carbon savings have not been calculated, due to the diverging performance of the black-box GP, and the lack of overlapping performance between the two NNs. In the next section, we will examine how we can embed knowledge of the physical system into a GP model via our choice of kernel function, and the possible carbon savings this can achieve. 11 7 Physics-Informed Kernel Selection 

As outlined in Section 4.1, our choice of kernel function in a GP model can be used to incorporate our knowledge of the system’s behaviour, using the kernel hyperparameters to tune the model to the system. In some cases, the optimisation problem can be simplified with this knowledge built in, requiring less training data to reach required performance, hereby potentially reducing our emissions. However, some kernel functions, particularly some derived from physics [49], are more complex than their more simple black-box coun-terparts, namely that they have more hyperparameters to learn, potentially increasing the training time, creating a trade-off between the number of hyperparameters and the amount of training data required to reach a performance threshold. To begin to explore this trade-off, a very simple “toy-box” test case was designed - a periodic surface defined by Equation 6 and shown in Figure 6. 

Figure 6: The toy-box surface used to explore physics-informed kernel selection. 

y = p|x2| sin(4 x1) (6) Three GP models were designed with various “greyness”, with the embedded knowledge concerning the periodicity of the surface. Black-1, is a standard black-box GP regression with an SE kernel and a constant mean function, with four hyperparameters to learn -the lengthscale and output variance from the kernel, the mean, and the observation noise. The two grey-box models differ to Black-1 by multiplying the SE kernel by a periodic kernel, outlined in Equation 7, which we use as our physics knowledge proxy. 

kP er (x, x ′) = σ2exp (− 2sin 2(π|x − x′|/p )

l2 ) (7) The periodic kernel consists of 3 hyperparameters - lengthscale ( l), output variance (σ2), and period ( p). The grey-box models have a total of 6 hyperparameters - the length-scale and period from the periodic kernel, the lengthscale from the SE kernel, an overall output variance, the mean, and the observation noise. To mimic scenarios of more or less information available on system parameters, in the first grey-box model, Grey-1, the pe-riod is bounded within 10% of the true value, and in the second grey-box model, Grey-2, 12 the period is fixed at the true value and therefore not optimised in the training process. Therefore, Grey-2 is “whiter” than Grey-1, and has one fewer hyperparameter to learn. A description of the three models is shown in Table 2.            

> Black-1 Grey-1 Grey-2 Mean function Constant Constant Constant Covariance function SE SE*Periodic SE*Periodic Number of hyperparameters to be optimised 465

Table 2: Model details for Black-1, Grey-1, and Grey-2. In Grey-2 the period of the second covariance is fixed to the known value. The models predicted the amplitude of the surface, y, given x1 and x2 inputs. Coverage was varied in 10% intervals across the x1 variable, with 100 training data points per 10%. To train the models, the ADAM gradient descent optimiser [39] was used with 1000 iterations. While the footprints of these models will be very small, this work aims to form the foundation of a concept that can be scaled up to much larger models, where carbon savings become much more significant. 

7.1 An engineering test case 

The same methodology described above was applied to a set of engineering data, collected for use in an SHM study from a lab-based modal test of a simple metallic aircraft structure - the GARTEUR SM-AG19 benchmark, shown in Figure 7 (see [50] and [51] for specific details). For this work, the wing, instrumented with accelerometers, was excited via an electro-dynamic shaker to produce a response in its first mode (close to 10Hz), producing a similar learning surface to that of the toy-box example above - see Figure 8. The ML task for this initial study is to predict the acceleration response spatially and temporally, with the same periodic kernel employed as above used to bring in “knowledge” of the periodic nature of the modal response. Two test cases were employed: the first using the accelerometer positions and every tenth data point, the second using an upsampled dataset, as can be seen in Figure 8, such that each 10% of surface coverage contains 200 training data points. 

Figure 7: The GARTEUR structure used to collect the engineering test case data,[51]. 13 (a) Original (b) Upsampled 

Figure 8: The different training data layouts used for the GARTEUR test cases with 20% training data coverage. 

7.2 Results and Discussion 

Figures 9, 10 and 11 show the NMSE and run time results of the grey-box and black-box models for each of the three test cases. These show that the NMSE of the physics-informed models drops sharply compared to the black-box with increasing coverage. As a result, the grey-box models would require less training data to meet an NMSE threshold compared to the black-box, with Grey-2 requiring the least, as expected due to the additional knowledge embedded in the model. In terms of computations, Figures 9b, 10b and 11b show that for a given coverage, the black-box has the fastest run time, followed by Grey-2, with Grey-1 being the slow-est, correlated to the number of hyperparameters in each model. In a Gaussian process regression we expect that runtime is dominated by a term proportional to the training data size ( N ) cubed, with a secondary term from the gradient descent proportional to the number of hyperparameters to be optimised ( H) and training data squared [52], making the computation ∼ O (N 3) + O(HN 2). In a standard GP implementation, we therefore expect that when N is large, the impact of the hyperparameter optimisation on runtime is insignificant, though it is more prominent at small N , especially in complex models with many hyperparameters. In this initial exploratory work both hyperparameter counts and training data sizes are small in themselves. Taking an NMSE threshold of <10, we can see that in each case, Grey-2 can achieve this with the least training data, followed by Grey-1, and then Black-1. In the toy-box case, this leads to emissions reductions of 73.3% and 6.7% when comparing Grey-2 and Grey-1 to Black-1 respectively (0.45 gCO 2e for Black-1, 0.42 gCO 2e for Grey-1, and 0.12 gCO 2e for Grey-2), showing that the increase in model complexity from additional hyperparameters is overcome by the runtime reduction from reducing training data. Conversely, considering the original GARTEUR data, Grey-1 and Grey-2 increase the emissions by 71.4% and 42.9% respectively, compared to Black-1 (0.07 gCO 2e for Black-1, 0.12 gCO 2e for Grey-1, and 0.10 gCO 2e for Grey-2). Finally, the upsampled GARTEUR case shows Grey-1 increase the emissions by 65.7% and Grey-2 reduce them by 89.7% compared to Black-1 (2.04 gCO 2e for Black-1, 3.38 gCO 2e for Grey-1, and 0.21 gCO 2e for Grey-2). These sets of results highlight that using physics to reduce training data requirements is not enough in itself to reduce the emissions of a model - we must also consider the complexity of the optimisation, here driven by hyperparameter count. As expected, the results also suggest that the emissions savings from introducing physics will be more prominent at 14 large training data sizes (which offers a reduction in emissions from collecting and storing data as well as runtime). 20 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 

Black-1 Grey-1 Grey-2 Training data coverage (%) NMSE 

(a) NMSE 20 40 60 80 100 010 20 30 40 50 60 Black-1 Grey-1 Grey-2 Training data coverage (%) Runtime (s)  (b) Time 

Figure 9: Toy-box NMSE and run time results. 20 40 60 80 100 050 100 150 200 

Black-1 Grey-1 Grey-2 Training data coverage (%) NMSE 

(a) NMSE 20 40 60 80 100 2.5 33.5 44.5 

Black-1 Grey-1 Grey-2 Training data coverage (%) Runtime (s)  (b) Time 

Figure 10: NMSE and run time results for the original GARTEUR data layout. 20 40 60 80 100 050 100 150 200 250 300 350 400 Black-1 Grey-1 Grey-2 Training data coverage (%) NMSE 

(a) NMSE 20 40 60 80 100 020 40 60 80 100 120 140 160 Black-1 Grey-1 Grey-2 Training data coverage (%) Runtime (s)  (b) Time 

Figure 11: NMSE and run time results for the upsampled GARTEUR data layout. The next section will investigate a case study where the kernel itself has been designed to include physics knowledge in the form of a switching model, adding increased complexity again into the grey-box learner. 15 8 Switching Kernels 

As a second example of a hybrid model, where the explanatory power of the data-driven and physics components are more equally shared than other approaches, we explore here the performance of GPs with and without switching behaviour built into the covariance function. Switching kernels are helpful when we see a change in the system behaviour under certain conditions. This change can be difficult for a black-box model to learn, particularly if there is little data from some operating regimes, giving the grey-box model in this case study a significant performance advantage. Given the increased performance, we might expect to see significant gains in reducing run time, however, the switching kernels themselves have more hyperparameters to learn compared to a standard SE kernel, and the optimisation problem can become more complex. Once again, we must explore the trade-off between optimisation complexity and training data requirements to determine if this PIML method can reduce emissions. The models used in this case study were first developed in [35] to investigate the deck acceleration of the Tamar Suspension Bridge in response to wind load and direction. As the bridge is orientated in the east-west direction, high speed winds from the north and south will cause higher deck accelerations than winds from the east and west [44]. The data shows a quadratic relationship between high speed southerly winds and deck acceleration, suggesting that these winds generate lift on the bridge deck. To encapsulate this behaviour, a second order polynomial kernel was used to represent the lift force. However, this force is only present under certain loading conditions, so a composite weighting function with two sigmoids was used to ensure the lift kernel only activates when the wind speed is high and aligns with the north-south direction. The final physics-informed kernel mixture is shown in Equation 8 [35]. 

k(θ, θ ′, u, u ′) = wcomp (u, u ′, θ, θ ′)wcomp (u, u ′, θ, θ ′)kLift (u, u ′)

| {z }

> lift force at high N/S winds

+ wcomp (−u, −u′, −θ, −θ′)wcomp (u, u ′, θ, θ ′)kSE (u, u ′)

| {z }

> otherwise, use a Squared Exponential kernel

(8) where u is wind speed, θ is wind angle, wcomp is the composite weighting function, kLif t 

is the second order polynomial kernel and kSE is the SE kernel. Additionally, a regime-dependent heteroscedastic noise term was added to incorporate the increased variance in deck acceleration at high wind speeds. In [35], several models with varying “greyness” were compared in terms of their performance with 300 randomly selected training points up to 30 mph winds to demonstrate their extrapolation ability. Here, we use the SE kernel model as our black-box model, and the physics-informed mixture kernel with linearly scaling heteroscedastic noise as our grey-box model, varying the training data between 100 and 1000 points at intervals of 100, maintaining the same 30 mph limit in training. The optimiser is a quantum particle swarm optimiser (QPSO) with a population size of 200 and a tolerance of 10 −4 and three restarts. 

8.1 Results and Discussion 

Figure 12 shows the NMSE and training time results for the black-box and grey-box models with different training data quantities. Figure 12a shows that the grey-box model consistently outperforms the black-box model across all training data quantities and the model performances do not converge. This is to be expected - for a black-box model, increasing training data may improve interpolation performance, but the model will remain unable to extrapolate and training 16 200 400 600 800 1000 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 Black-Box Grey-Box Training data quantity NMSE (a) NMSE 200 400 600 800 1000 0100 200 300 400 500 Black-Box Grey-Box Training data quantity Training time (s)  (b) Training Time 

Figure 12: The results from the switching kernel case study, showing the NMSE and training time for the black-box and grey-box models. data were limited to speeds under 30mph. The grey-box model however can extrapolate thanks to the physics-informed mixture kernel, giving it a performance advantage across all training data quantities. Figure 12b shows that for a given data quantity, the grey-box model takes longer to train than the black-box model, with this difference becoming more significant as training data quantity increases. The black-box SE kernel has three hyperparameters to learn, whereas the grey-box mixture kernel has eleven, though some of these were bounded to reduce the search space. The optimisation problem therefore spans more dimensions so not only are there more hyperparameters to learn, but the optimisation problem itself is more complex. The switch in the kernel mixture is also unstable, meaning the QPSO requires more generations to converge - as each generation requires an inversion of the covariance matrix, this scales the computational cost significantly, explaining the sharp increase in training time for the grey-box model. It is clear from Figure 12b that even with less training data, the grey-box model may have a longer training time hence higher training emissions than the black-box model. That said, the grey-box performance with 300 data points is strong while the training time remains relatively low, so time/emissions savings are still possible. As there is no performance threshold that both models can achieve, with the black-box not able to match grey-box performance at any level, we cannot directly compare their equivalent emissions. As an additional consideration, Figure 13 shows the NMSE results for six runs of the black-box and grey-box models with different random training data selections. It shows that the black-box has a higher variance in performance and is more sensitive to training data layout, whereas the grey-box model is more robust, suggesting that more repeats of the black-box model may be necessary to ensure good model performance. This case study highlights several important points for us to consider. Firstly, some-times, increasing training data only leads to marginal performance gains while significantly scaling the run time. We must consider the necessity of these one percent gains against the penalty of doubling or tripling (or worse) our emissions from training - we will likely find them to be superfluous. Secondly, we should consider the sensitivity of our models to training data layout to avoid needing to repeat training runs to achieve good perfor-mance, creating unnecessary emissions in the process. Finally, where training data are few or incomplete in certain conditions, the grey-box models that are able to extrapolate must necessarily out-perform their black-box counterparts. Depending on our performance needs, it may be that we can implement the black-box model to reduce training time and emissions, or we may require the grey-box advantage for a suitable model. In any case, if possible, it would be advantageous to be aware of the emissions from training and con-17 sider the trade-offs before we start collecting training data. In this way, we can also make carbon savings from the collection and storage of unnecessary training data. 200 400 600 800 1000 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100      

> Training data quantity NMSE
> (a) Black-Box 200 400 600 800 1000 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> Training data quantity NMSE (b) Grey-Box

Figure 13: The variation in NMSE for the black-box and grey-box models across six runs with different random training data selections. The final study in this paper, constrained GP modelling, is explored in the following section. 

# 9 Constrained Gaussian Processes 

Constrained GPs lay towards the data-driven end of the physics-informed spectrum. There are many ways to implement constraints within a GP model, each designed to limit the model behaviour in some way such that it aligns with the real-world system. This restricts the function space, as behaviours that violate physical constraints are ruled out, potentially decreasing the amount of training data required to reach a given level of accuracy. The models used in this case study were first developed in [38] to learn difference in time of arrival (∆T) acoustic emission (AE) maps for damage localisation. While AE maps can be a valuable tool for SHM, and crack localisation in particular, they require the collection of extensive data from artificial sources across the whole structure. Being able to collect data sparsely from a limited area of a structure alongside a machine learner allows for a more efficient and cost-effective approach. However irregularities in the structure, such as holes or bolts, disrupt the AE wave propagation, making the machine learning task challenging in sparse data settings. A physics-informed approach that incorporates these features and their effects into the model helps remedy this problem, reducing the need for extensive data collection and allowing for accurate damage localisation. This case study used a complex plate shown in Figure 14, originally used in [53]. The geometry is incorporated into the model through a sparse approximation of the kernel function, in this case using an eigendecomposition of the Laplace operator of a fixed domain [54]: 

k(x, x′) ≈

> m

X

> j=1

S

pλj



ϕj (x)ϕj (x′) (9) where ϕj and λj are the eigenfunctions and eigenvalues of the Laplace operator, S is the spectral density of the kernel, and m is the number of bases used in the approximation. To create the grey-box model, the domain was fixed to reflect the known boundaries. This method of approximating the kernel function reduces the computational complexity of the GP from O(n3) to O(nm 2), where n is the training data quantity and m is the number 18 Figure 14: The plate used as a test case for the ∆T AE map ML task from [53] of bases used in the approximation, which is fixed at 256 in this work. Therefore, two black-box models are used for comparison: the standard GP with an SE kernel, and a sparse GP using the same approximation but with a wide domain that is away from the actual boundaries, such that physical knowledge is not encoded here. We look here at the case from [38] where the grey-box approach has the most advantage - which is when training data available are from a limited section of the plate. Such a scenario is relevant in many engineering scenarios where we cannot access the entire structure when collecting data. 

9.1 Results and Discussion 

Figure 15 shows the NMSE and training time results for the black-box, sparse black-box, and grey-box models with different training data quantities across a fixed domain, that is from a cross section of the plate. Figure 15a shows that the grey-box outperforms both black-box models when training data quantity is low, however the grey-box and standard black-box models converge to similar performance as the training data quantity increases, with the sparse black-box model performing the worst. This highlights that the sparse approximation comes at a cost to performance when it does not incorporate physical knowledge, though at some thresholds, the performance of the sparse black-box model is sufficient for the task at hand. Taking a threshold of NMSE <10 as an example, the grey-box achieves a 35.5% emissions reduction compared to the standard black-box model, though the sparse black-box model sees a 58.1% reduction in emissions (0.31 gCO 2e for the standard black-box, 0.20 gCO 2e for the grey-box and 0.13 gCO 2e for the sparse black-box). Figure 15b shows that both sparse models have shorter training times than the standard black-box GP, as expected due to their reduced computational complexity, although this only becomes prominent at large training data quantities. Therefore, we see that in regions where 19 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 510 15 20 25            

> Black-Box Grey-Box Sparse Black-Box Training data quantity NMSE (a) NMSE 0100 200 300 400 500 600 010 20 30 40 50
> Black-Box Grey-Box Sparse Black-Box Training data quantity Training time (s) (b) Training Time

Figure 15: The results in terms of NMSE and training time for the black-box, sparse black-box and grey-box models for the constrained GP case study. the grey-box performance is superior, the training time savings are insignificant, and conversely, in settings where the grey-box model sees a significant training time reduction, the performance is matched by the standard black-box model. This shows the importance of taking training time into consideration when selecting a model - taking a training data quantity of 600 as an example, the NMSE performances are indistinguishable, yet the training time of the grey-box is 25.9 times faster, meaning the emissions from training are a factor of 25.9 lower (3.11 gCO 2e for the standard black-box, and 0.12 gCO 2e for the grey-box). In this case study, the constrained physics-informed GP is undoubtedly our green-box model, as performance is either superior or equivalent, but training time is always reduced, sometimes by a significant factor. Having looked at five different case studies of PIML modelling and examining the impact of physics knowledge integration on emissions, the final section will summarise the findings and provide recommendations for future work in this area. 

# 10 Discussion and conclusions 

In this work, we examined five case studies of different PIML methods: residual mod-elling, input augmentation, hybrid models with physics-informed kernel selection (with and without switching), and constrained GPs. In each case, the physics-informed model was compared to an equivalent black-box model in terms of performance (normalised mean squared error) and training time to evaluate the impact of integrating physical knowledge on model emissions during training. Across the five case studies, several common themes emerged. Firstly, as expected, the performance advantage of physics-informed models is most prominent when training data quantity is low. In terms of emissions, requiring less training data to be collected is already a saving in terms of data storage and transmission; the best results here also showed notable reduction in run time and subsequent emissions from model training. At given target errors, we saw gains from each of the model types explored except in the input augmentation case study - where adapting the inputs to the GPs and neural networks made little difference. While you can cherry pick very good results in terms of savings from the case studies, the results are variable if you consider different target error thresholds. In a number of the case studies, we demonstrated how adding physical knowledge can increase model complexity, resulting in longer training times than a black-box model for a given dataset size; in these cases, a reduction in training data is essential to achieve a net benefit in 20 emissions. A third observation from the case studies is that grey-box models often demonstrate more consistent performance as training data increases or as the data layout changes, mak-ing them (in the cases shown) more reliable and robust than their black-box equivalents. In some applications, this reliability is more important than peak performance, making grey-box models the better choice even with a performance penalty. How does this compare to what we expect? The training time when establishing a regression model should broadly be a function of the complexity of the model, the amount of training data used, and the number of steps required to successfully navigate the cost surface during training. We expect that a physics-informed approach can help to lessen the requirement on training data, and indeed have demonstrated gains from this here -this is our main result and one that we expect to see much benefit from as we increase the considered training data from the relatively small sizes that we used for this initial work. We could particularly expect to see larger gains from this if the training data used requires access to the DRAM/VRAM - so long as our physics still holds in such cases. We have also seen that the increased complexity of some physics-informed models can counteract the gains from reduced data requirements, with a trade-off required between complexity cost and performance - this would of course also be true if we implemented less simple and more computationally expensive physics into the models. Here we saw the increased complexity manifest in an increased hyperparameter count in the GP models, lengthening the time needed during optimisation. Something that we have only touched briefly on here in the context of residual models, is also the possibility that physics could make the cost surface less navigable and increase runtime. Our results are positive but with a number of caveats and trade-offs. When considering responsible computing, we advocate that a key first step is establish-ing the required level of model performance, something we hope is achievable in many en-gineering settings. Defining this target allows researchers to align their modelling strategy and dataset size with carbon reduction goals, avoiding the pursuit of marginal performance gains that often come at a heavy carbon cost. In many cases, our findings suggest that physics-informed models can reach target performance thresholds with lower emissions than their black-box counterparts, although these savings remain problem-dependent and currently do require case-by-case evaluation. Because each PIML method in this study was evaluated within a single engineering context, these findings cannot yet be generalised across all domain applications or tech-niques. Nonetheless, this work provides a clear foundation for future research. Expanding these methods across broader engineering domains will help clarify precisely when and where specific PIML approaches yield green-box models. Furthermore, evaluating addi-tional PIML techniques not covered here may reveal further opportunities for emissions reductions compared to standard black-box baselines. 

# References 

[1] E. J. Cross et al. , “A spectrum of physics-informed gaussian processes for regression in engineering,” vol. 5, p. e8. [2] A. Cicirello, “Physics-enhanced machine learning: a position paper for dynamical systems investigations,” in Journal of Physics: Conference Series , vol. 2909, no. 1. IOP Publishing, 2024, p. 012034. [3] M. Haywood-Alexander et al. , “Discussing the spectrum of physics-enhanced machine learning: a survey on structural mechanics applications,” Data-Centric Engineering , vol. 5, p. e31, 2024. 21 [4] S. Sajadieh et al. , “The ai index 2026 annual report,” AI Index Steering Committee, Institute for Human-Centered AI, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, Tech. Rep., April 2026. [5] R. Selvan, Sustainable AI . O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2025. [6] E. Giglio, “Extractivism and its socio-environmental impact in south america. overview of the “lithium triangle”,” Am´ erica Cr´ ıtica , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 47–53, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://dialnet.unirioja.es/servlet/articulo?codigo=8104956[Accessed:24-09-2026] [7] A. S. Luccioni, S. Viguier, and A.-L. Ligozat, “Estimating the carbon footprint of BLOOM, a 176b parameter language model,” Journal of Machine Learning Research , vol. 24, pp. 1–15, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://jmlr.org/papers/volume24/23-0069/23-0069.pdf [8] P. Li et al. , “Making AI less “thirsty”: Uncovering and addressing the secret water footprint of AI models,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.03271 , 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03271 [9] I. E. Agency, “Energy and ai,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.iea.org/reports/energy-and-ai[Accessed:20/09/2026] [10] L. Lannelongue et al. , “Ten simple rules to make your computing more environmentally sustainable,” vol. 17, no. 9, publisher: Public Library of Science. [Online]. Available: https://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009324 [11] R. Fischer, “Ground-truthing ai energy consumption: Validating codecarbon against external measurements.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.22092 [12] A. Lacoste et al. , “Quantifying the carbon emissions of machine learning.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1910.09700 [13] B. Courty et al. Code carbon methodology. [Online]. Available: https://docs.codecarbon.io/latest/explanation/methodology/[Accessed:01-12-2026] [14] S. A. Budennyy et al. , “eco2ai: Carbon emissions tracking of machine learning models as the first step towards sustainable ai,” vol. 106, no. Suppl 1, pp. S118–S128. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1134/S1064562422060230 [15] L. Bouza, A. Bugeau, and L. Lannelongue, “How to estimate carbon footprint when training deep learning models? a guide and review,” vol. 5, no. 11, p. 115014. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1088/2515-7620/acf81b [16] G. Menghani, “Efficient deep learning: A survey on making deep learning models smaller, faster, and better,” ACM Computing Surveys , vol. 22, no. 12, 2023. [17] S. Han et al. , “Learning both weights and connections for efficient neural networks,” 2015. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1506.02626 [18] A. Gholami et al. , “A survey of quantization methods for efficient neural network inference,” jun 2021. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2103.13630 [19] S. Sharify et al. , “Post training quantization of large language models with microscaling formats,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.07135 22 [20] DeepSeek-AI et al. , “Deepseek-v3 technical report,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2412.19437 [21] D. Dai et al. , “Deepseekmoe: Towards ultimate expert specialization in mixture-of-experts language models,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2401.06066 [22] W. S. Jevons, The Coal Question: An Inquiry Concerning the Progress of the Nation, and the Probable Exhaustion of Our Coal-Mines . Macmillan and Co., 1865. [23] A. Quarteroni and G. Rozza, Eds., Reduced Order Methods for Modeling and Computational Reduction . Springer International Publishing, 2014. [24] P. Benner, S. Gugercin, and K. Willcox, “A survey of projection-based model reduction methods for parametric dynamical systems,” SIAM Review , vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 483–531, 2015. [25] J. Sacks et al. , “Design and analysis of computer experiments,” Statistical Science ,vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 409–423, 1989. [26] J. Kudela and R. Matousek, “Recent advances and applications of surrogate models for finite element method computations: a review,” Soft Computing , vol. 26, pp. 13 709–13 733, 2022. [27] C. Meng et al. , “When physics meets machine learning: a survey of physics-informed machine learning,” Machine Learning: Computation and Science and Engineering , vol. 1, p. 20, 2025. [28] E. J. Cross et al. , “Physics-informed machine learning for structural health monitoring,” in Structural Health Monitoring Based on Data Science Techniques ,ser. Structural Integrity. Springer, 2022, vol. 21. [29] J. Stiasny and S. Chatzivasileiadis, “Physics-informed neural networks for time-domain simulations: Accuracy, computational cost, and flexibility,” Electric Power Systems Research , vol. 224, p. 109748, 2023. [30] T. E. Fernandes, R. W. dos Santos, and M. Lobosco, “Computational cost and accuracy of physics-informed and conventional nns for immune response modeling,” 

Journal of Computational Science , vol. 100, p. 102994, 2026. [31] S. Wang, Y. Teng, and P. Perdikaris, “Understanding and mitigating gradient pathologies in physics-informed neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.04536 ,2020. [32] M. Seeger, “Gaussian processes for machine learning,” International Journal of Neural Systems , vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 69–106, 2004. [33] K. Gurney, An Introduction to Neural Networks . UCL Press, 1997. [34] D. Duvenaud, “Automatic model construction with gaussian processes,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Cambridge, 2014. [Online]. Available: https://www.repository.cam.ac.uk/items/a54f0711-f777-4ee1-a685-3b76dae5ad91 [35] D. J. Pitchforth et al. , “Physics-informed kernel mixtures for structural dynamics,” 

Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 254, p. 114330, 2026. 23 [36] A. Pensoneault, X. Yang, and X. Zhu, “Nonnegativity-enforced gaussian process regression,” Theoretical and Applied Mechanics Letters , vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 182–187, 2020. [37] J. Riihim¨ aki and A. Vehtari, “Gaussian processes with monotonicity information,” in Proceedings of the Thirteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics , ser. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 9. Chia Laguna Resort, Sardinia, Italy: PMLR, 2010, pp. 645–652. [Online]. Available: https://proceedings.mlr.press/v9/riihimaki10a.html [38] M. R. Jones, T. J. Rogers, and E. J. Cross, “Constraining gaussian processes for physics-informed acoustic emission mapping,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 188, p. 109984, 2023. [39] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2017. [40] B. C. et al. Global energy mix data. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/mlco2/codecarbon/blob/master/codecarbon/data/ private infra/global energy mix.json[Accessed:01-12-2026] [41] J. Adamson, “Carbon and the cloud,” Stanford Magazine , May/June 2017. [Online]. Available: https://stanfordmag.org/contents/carbon-and-the-cloud[Accessed:20-09-2026] [42] D. S. Brennan et al. , “Foundations of population-based SHM, part v: Network, framework and database,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 223, p. 111602, 2025. [43] S. Zhang, T. J. Rogers, and E. J. Cross, “Gaussian process based grey-box modelling for shm of structures under fluctuating environmental conditions,” in 

European Workshop on Structural Health Monitoring , ser. Lecture Notes in Civil Engineering, vol. 128. Cham: Springer, 2021, pp. 55–66. [44] E. Cross, “On structural health monitoring in changing environmental and operational conditions,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Sheffield, 2012. [Online]. Available: https://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/id/eprint/2673/ [45] R. Westgate, “Environmental effects on a suspension bridge’s performance,” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Sheffield, 2012. [Online]. Available: https://etheses.whiterose.ac.uk/id/eprint/2884/ [46] S. Reed, “A parametric-based empennage fatigue monitoring system using artificial neural networks,” in 23rd ICAF Symposium of the International Committee on Aeronautical Fatigue , 2005, pp. 693–704. [47] S. J. Gibson, T. J. Rogers, and E. J. Cross, “Distributions of fatigue damage from data-driven strain prediction using gaussian process regression,” Structural Health Monitoring , vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 3065–3076, 2023. [48] J. D. Anderson, Introduction to Flight , 8th ed. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill Education, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.mheducation.com/highered/ product/anderson-introduction-to-flight-8th-edition/9780078027653.html[Accessed: 22-09-2026] [49] E. J. Cross and T. J. Rogers, “Physics-derived covariance functions for machine learning in structural dynamics,” in 19th IFAC Symposium on System Identification (SYSID): learning models for decision and control. 

24 [50] M. Link and M. Friswell, “Working group 1: Generation of validated structural dynamic models—results of a benchmark study utilising the garteur sm-ag19 test-bed,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 9–20, 1 2003. [51] S. J. Gibson, E. J. Cross, and T. J. Rogers, “Physics-informed machine learning for probabilistic fatigue and damage modelling using gaussian process regression,” PhD thesis, University of Sheffield, 10 2024. [52] C. E. Rasmussen and C. K. I. Williams, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning ,Cambridge, MA, 2006. [53] J. Hensman et al. , “Locating acoustic emission sources in complex structures using gaussian processes,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing , vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 211–223, 2010. [54] A. Solin and S. S¨ arkk¨ a, “Hilbert space methods for reduced-rank gaussian process regression,” Statistics and Computing , vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 419–446, 2020. 25