Title: Constraining exoplanet population parameters with Kepler and simulation-based inference

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.37960v1

Published Time: Wed, 30 Sep 2026 02:23:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 6

Markdown Content:
Unraveling the joint lives of Stars and Exoplanets Proceedings IAU Symposium 408 No. 408 , G. Buldgen, A. Vidotto, & A. Miglio, eds. 

doi:10.1017/xxxxx 

# Constraining exoplanet population parameters with Kepler and simulation-based inference 

Chlo´ e Padois 1 , Friedrich Anders 1 , Daniel del Ser 2,1

> 1

Departament de F´ ısica Qu` antica i Astrof´ ısica, Institut de Ci` encies del Cosmos (ICCUB), Universitat de Barcelona (IEEC-UB), Mart´ ı i Franqu` es 1, 08028 Barcelona, Spain 

> 2

Observatori Fabra, Reial Acad` emia de Ci` encies i Arts de Barcelona (RACAB), Rambla dels Estudis, 115, E-08002 Barcelona, Spain 

Abstract. In the context of the rapidly growing field of galactic exoplanet population studies, we present an exoplanet simulator capable of generating synthetic populations for millions of stars in a few seconds (Padois et al. 2025). Our framework combines observed exoplanet detections with the latest planetary formation models, incorporating dependencies between host star properties and planet occurrence rates, orbital period distributions, and other key demographic features. However, many model parameters remain uncertain and model-dependent. To constrain some of the most critical ones, we couple our simulator with simulation-based inference (SBI): we define a set of 44 free parameters describing the population of different planet types (occurrence rates, mass-period distribution, mass-radius relation, etc.), run mil-lions of simulations sampling from broad prior distributions, simulate their detectability by Kepler , and train a machine-learning algorithm to learn the relationships between input parameters and the resulting “observed” synthetic populations. The best-fit parameters are then inferred by comparing model outputs to real observations, for which we adopt the Kepler confirmed planet catalogue as our reference dataset, since it provides the largest homogeneous sample from a single facility. We present preliminary results for the planet occurrence rate as a function of stellar mass and metallicity, across different planet types, along with constraints on several key simulation parameters such as the orbital period distribution and the inclination dispersion within planetary systems. These refined parameters enable us to refine our yield predictions for upcoming exoplanet detection missions, including PLATO, Roman , and HAYDN. 

Keywords. planetary systems, methods: statistical, Galaxy: evolution, Galaxy: kinematics and dynamics, stars: fundamental parameters 

1. Introduction 

Despite the rapid growth of the number of detected exoplanets in the past decades, our knowledge of exoplanet formation and evolution is limited by observational biases and detec-tion performance. Most confirmed exoplanets are situated in the Solar Neighbourhood (80% of them at less than 1 kpc from the Sun), but the micro-lensing technique already allowed the detection of around 200 confirmed planets at distances between 5 and 8 kpc, opening the way to the study of the exoplanet population from a Galactic perspective. Since the introduction of the Galactic Habitable Zone (GHZ) concept by Gonzalez et al. (2001), the question of how planets are distributed in the Milky Way has recently regained significant interest (e.g. Baba et al. 2023; Boettner et al. 2024; Padois et al. 2025; Spitoni et al. 2025). From this Galactic point of view, we can ask how homogeneous the exoplanet population is at Galactic distance scales, what shapes the exact relations between host star properties and exoplanet formation, or how the planet population is influenced by Galactic evolution (e.g. chemistry and radial migration). To address these questions, we need to simulate observations of synthetic exoplanet populations and compare the results with the actual observations from planet-detection missions. 

> © International Astronomical Union, 2026 arXiv:2609.37960v1 [astro-ph.EP] 29 Sep 2026

2 Padois et al.  

> Figure 1. One of the main results from Padois et al. (2025): the variation of the frequency of planet types as a function of position in the Galaxy. Left: definition of Galactic regions. Middle: Number of planets per star for each region and planet type, obtained with the first version of our code. Right: same as middle panel but with our latest version (note the different scales in the middle and right panels).

Different flavours of planet population synthesis (PPS) models exist (Mordasini et al. 2015). Most of them simulate the exoplanet formation from the protoplanetary disc via pebble or planetesimal accretion (see Burn & Mordasini (2024) for a review). Nevertheless, applying any of those detailed PPS models to a Galactic-scale sample would be computationally very expensive. We therefore developed a new framework to directly simulate the final exoplanet population in its stable state, combining traditional PPS predictions with constraints from earlier observations. In Sect. 2 we summarized the first version of the code, before presenting how we refined the model using simulation-based inference (SBI) in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4 we show the preliminary results we obtain with the best predicted values, and we conclude in Sect. 5. 

2. Our previous attempt at simulating the Galactic exoplanet population 

In Padois et al. (2025), we presented a first version ( v1 ) of our fast exoplanet population synthesis modelling. It can be summarized in two steps: (1) For each star, depending on its mass and metallicity, we determine how many planets of different types it hosts. (2) To each planet, depending on its category (Earth-like, Super-Earth, Neptune or giant), we assign physical parameters like orbital period, inclination, radius, mass, etc. (based on prescriptions inspired by the literature). For example, the occurrence rates were based on the works of Burn et al. (2021) and Narang et al. (2018). We applied this v1 of our exoplanet simulation to different regions of a Milky-Way analogue galaxy simulation ( g7.55e11 from the NIHAO-UHD suite, Buck et al. (2020); see Fig. 1). The main results are that we predict that Earth-likes are most likely the dominant type of planets in all Galactic regions, even if they remain significantly under-represented in current observations, and that we confirm that metal-poor regions likely host fewer exoplanets per star on average, compared to metal-richer regions (as also predicted by Boettner et al. 2024). To evaluate the accuracy of our framework, we then applied our exoplanet simulator to the stars in the Kepler target list. For all simulated planets, we simulated if their transit would be detectable by Kepler , based on their radius, orbital period, host star radius and magnitude, reproducing the most important of Kepler ’s sensitivity features. While our simulation repro-duced some of the features seen in the Kepler data, a detailed comparison revealed that our model over-predicted the number of detected planets in the Kepler field by a factor of ∼ 10 and also did not match the observed distribution in the period-radius diagram very well. We already speculated in Paper I that the significant over-production of exoplanets is likely mostly coming from our occurrence rate model, based on NGPPS† output, Emsenhuber et al. (2025), and clearly shows that we need to adjust our model. 

> † New Generation Planetary Population Synthesis

Constraining exoplanet population parameters with Kepler 3

3. Improving our exoplanet population synthesis with SBI 

In order to obtain a more realistic simulation, we made major architecture changes in the code, identifying 44 key parameters which need to be constrained. Those parameters can be divided in 4 groups, depending on what they influence. See Table 1 for a summary. The major changes with respect to v1 include a) splitting the Super-Earths/Neptunes category in two dif-ferent groups; b) changing the occurrence rate modelling: in v1 we combined and interpolated literature references (Narang et al. 2018; Burn et al. 2021), which we replaced in the latest version by the use of adjustable functions (Johnson’s SU distributions); and c) allowing for updates to many of the involved parameters. parameter category total number well constrained occurrence rate & multiplicity 19 8period/mass distribution 18 14 mass-radius conversion 6 4inclination 1 1

Table 1. Free parameters in the latest version of our model, adjusted with SBI using Kepler data, grouped by their influence on the exoplanet simulation process. We specify in the right column for how many parameters we obtain good constraint for a training on 3 million simulations. 

As we work in a high-dimensional parameter space, it is delicate to model the correlated influence of all the model parameters. We use SBI to better constrain 44 parameters (see Table 1) and study their correlations. Our SBI methodology, summarized in Fig. 2, consists of the following steps: - Occurrence rates (M, [Fe/H])        

> - Multiplicity statistics
> - Mass-period distributions
> - Ratio Hot/Cold Jupiters
> - ...
> (2) compare with
> real observations
> by Kepler
> (1) learn input-
> output relation
> (3) infer the posterior
> distribution of model
> parameters
> (0) run simulations
> varying all model
> parameters
> (4) (more) accurate
> simulated exoplanet
> population
> Kepler input catalogue
> (~200.000 stars)
> > Precise stellar parameters

Figure 2. Visual summary of the simulation-based inference method used to optimise our exoplanet population synthesis model (Padois et al., in prep.). 4 Padois et al. 

(0) Randomly varying all model parameters to cover the full parameter space, we run millions of forward PPS simulations. (1) Core of the SBI process: we train a neural network to learn the relationship between the sampled input model parameters and the associated output, in our case the statistical properties of the Kepler -“detectable” exoplanet population. (2) We define our reference observation: the candidate exoplanets actually detected by 

Kepler . We use the sources classified as candidates by the Kepler pipeline (source with “CANDIDATE ” flag in Q1-Q17 DR25 table†), guaranteeing an homogeneous detection process (Thompson et al. 2018). (3) Given the reference observation and the trained neural network, we infer the posterior distribution for all 44 free parameters to best reproduce Kepler observations. (4) Finally, we run the exoplanet simulation using the most probable value(s) from the posterior distribution for each parameter and update our fiducial PPS model from v1 to 

latest (see Figs. 1 and 3). 

4. Preliminary results 

We run our exoplanet simulation, using for each parameter the most probable value (maxi-mum of the posterior distribution). We obtain a realistic distribution in radius-period space, as shown in the right panel of Fig. 3. The main improvement with respect to the previous version perhaps is the predicted number of detected exoplanets: while our first version (tied closely to the predictions of the NGPPS model) was producing more than ten time too much detectable planets compared to Kepler candidates, with the latest version we now obtain a similar num-ber to the observation. Drawing 100 random samples from the posterior distribution, we obtain 3 819 ± 212 detectable exoplanets, while 3 930 candidates exoplanets have been identified in 

Kepler DR25.      

> Figure 3. Planets in the Kepler field of view. Left panel: Kepler candidates from DR25, used as reference observation. Middle panel: simulated exoplanets with the first version of our model (Padois et al. 2025). Right panel: simulated exoplanet with our best version of the simulator, after constraining the parameters with SBI. All populations are coloured by signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) value (common colour scale), and for both simulated population we show in background the total population, before applying any detectability condition.

Applying our latest model to the same Galactic regions as presented in Sect. 2, we obtain similar variation between the different regions, now considering Super-Earths and Neptunes as two distinct categories. The results are shown in the rightmost panel of Fig. 1. The main  

> †https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/cgi-bin/TblView/nph-tblView?app= ExoTbls&config=q1_q17_dr25_koi

Constraining exoplanet population parameters with Kepler 5

Figure 4. Estimated sensitivity threshold of different missions: Kepler , Roman , Gaia DR4 & DR5, and PLATO. Confirmed exoplanets are coloured by detection method and the Solar System planets are shown in black for reference. 

change is in the total number of planets per star, diminishing by a factor of ∼ 10 with respect to v1 , which is a direct consequence of the improved adjustment of the occurrence rate and planet multiplicity as a function of stellar mass and metallicity. The derived occurrence rate functions, as well as a deeper analysis of all constraints obtained on the model parameters will be discussed in Padois et al. (2026, in prep.). 

5. Conclusions and outlook 

We have presented preliminary results from an upcoming paper that pioneers the use of simulation-based inference for exoplanet population studies. We were able to significantly improve the performance of our exoplanet population simulator, yielding an overall population that matches the Kepler exoplanet census in many key aspects (Fig. 3). Now that we are more confident in the ability of our simulator to generate a realistic popula-tion, we can also use it to make more solid predictions for other exoplanet detection missions. For example, we ran preliminary tests for the PLATO southern field (LOPS2; Nascimbeni et al. 2025): we obtain in mean 4168 ± 84 detectable planets for an observation period of two years, which is coherent with latest estimate by Cabrera et al. (2026). The future data releases from Gaia (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016) and PLATO (Rauer et al. 2025) will open a new field of possibility, giving us access to homogeneously-detected samples in under-explored regions of the radius-period space. As shown in Fig. 4, Gaia DR4 and DR5 will be sensitive to long-period giants, while PLATO is expected to detect small rocky planets, potentially in their host star habitable zone. In the coming years, thanks to those new datasets, we will be able to further improve our model, by obtaining estimations for parameters currently poorly constrained due to a lack of statistically significant number of detections.   

> Acknowledgements. This work is funded by the Horizon Europe Marie Skłodowska-Curie Actions Doctoral Network MWGaiaDN (Grant agreement No. 101072454; https://www.mwgaiadn.eu/ ). This work was partially funded by the Spanish MICIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and by the ‘ERDF A way of making Europe’ funds by the European Union through grant RTI2018-095076-B-C21 and PID2021-122842OB-C21, and the Institute of Cosmos Sciences University of Barcelona (ICCUB, Unidad de Excelencia ‘Mar´ ıa de Maeztu’) through grant CEX2019-000918-M. FA acknowl-edges financial support from MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 through a RYC2021-031638-I grant co-funded by the European Union NextGenerationEU/PRTR.

6 Padois et al. 

References 

Baba, J., Saitoh, T. R., & Tsujimoto, T. 2023, MNRAS, 526, 6088 Boettner, C., Dayal, P., Trebitsch, M., et al. 2024, A&A, 686, A167 Buck, T., Obreja, A., Macci` o, A. V., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 3461 Burn, R. & Mordasini, C. 2024, in Handbook of Exoplanets, 143–2 Burn, R., Schlecker, M., Mordasini, C., et al. 2021, A&A, 656, A72 Cabrera, J., Rauer, H., Samadi, R., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.04818 Emsenhuber, A., Mordasini, C., Mayor, M., et al. 2025, A&A, 701, A64 Gaia Collaboration, Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., et al. 2016, A&A, 595, A1 Gonzalez, G., Brownlee, D., & Ward, P. 2001, Icarus, 152, 185 Mordasini, C., Molli` ere, P., Dittkrist, K.-M., Jin, S., & Alibert, Y. 2015, International Journal of Astrobiology, 14, 201 Narang, M., Manoj, P., Furlan, E., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 221 Nascimbeni, V., Piotto, G., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, A&A, 694, A313 Padois, C., del Ser, D., Anders, F., et al. 2025, A&A, 704, A275 Rauer, H., Aerts, C., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26 Spitoni, E., Palla, M., Magrini, L., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A58 Thompson, S. E., Coughlin, J. L., Hoffman, K., et al. 2018, ApJS, 235, 38