Title: Quantitative Links between Formation and Atmospheric Composition for Giant Planets

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.23682v1

Published Time: Wed, 26 Aug 2026 00:05:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
> Draft version August 26, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

Quantitative Links between Formation and Atmospheric Composition for Giant Planets 

Yayaati Chachan, 1 Ruth Murray-Clay, 1 and Jonathan J. Fortney 1

> 1Department of Astronomy and Astrophysics, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA95064, USA

ABSTRACT Precise atmospheric abundances of giant exoplanets are becoming increasingly prevalent and there is a need to systematically convert these measurements into metrics that inform us about the planets’ accretion history. We present a quantitative framework for relating atmospheric composition to the accretion of metals and primordial gas. This includes i) new relations that simplify and generalize the connection between atmospheric metallicity and metal mass fraction, ii) methods for inferring the source of the metals and quantifying the quantity of metals accreted via different sources, and iii) relating the derived quantities to expectations from formation models. We also derive a new estimate of the minimum disk mass needed to form a planetary system based on the amount of excess metals accreted by a planet, assuming that this excess originates from the drift and evaporation of pebbles at condensation fronts. This paper is accompanied by an open-source code that implements the methods presented herein. 

1. INTRODUCTION The composition of giant planet atmospheres provides an important window into the accretionary past of the planets. The presence, and in particular the enrichment, of metals in these atmospheres is a compelling indication that the provenance of planets differs from that of stars. Much insight about the formation of giant planets can be gained by understanding how giant planets acquire their metals. In many models of planet formation, giant planets accumulate solid and gaseous material through separate processes and the proportion of material pro-vided by each process can vary (e.g., Helled et al. 2014; Ikoma & Kobayashi 2025). Thus, the relative abundance of elements accreted as solids and gas is determined by the solid-to-gas accretion rate. Furthermore, in differ-ent regions of a protoplanetary disk, separated by snow-lines, different molecules are in solid form, meaning that detailed abundance ratios may be a powerful signature of formation location. This insight ( ¨Oberg et al. 2011) has led to many studies of the carbon-to-oxygen (C/O) ratio in exoplanet atmospheres (reviewed in Madhusud-han 2019; Kempton & Knutson 2024), but the practical utility of this approach has been limited by large uncer-tainties in the differential transport of materials within protoplanetary disks (e.g., ¨Oberg & Bergin 2016). Re-cent observational work constraining atmospheric abun-dances of a larger range of elements beyond C and O 

> Email: ychachan@ucsc.edu

(e.g., Smith et al. 2024; Pelletier et al. 2025; Lothringer et al. 2025; Chachan et al. 2025b; Ruffio et al. 2026; Xuan et al. 2026; Baburaj et al. 2026; Kanumalla et al. 2026; Parker et al. 2026; Xuan et al. 2026) provides the opportunity to use abundance ratios to constrain planet formation histories in a substantially more robust way. The characterization of elements that reside in refrac-tory species throughout the disk provides an especially powerful way of connecting composition to formation (Lothringer et al. 2021; Turrini et al. 2021; Schneider & Bitsch 2021; Chachan et al. 2023). These refractory ele-ments are tracers of solids and therefore their abundance unambiguously reveals the solid-to-gas accretion rate of giant planets, removing a major degeneracy. With this grounding, elements that sometimes reside in volatiles (such as C and O) provide additional information about the origin of metals and reveal the nature of the solids that were accreted as well as the quantity of metals ac-creted from the gas phase. Atmospheric measurements of extrasolar giant plan-ets are entering a new population-level era (Kempton & Knutson 2024; Lothringer et al. 2026). Given the rich-ness of the existing and upcoming datasets, we present some guiding principles and an open source tool to build connections between the atmospheres, interiors, and for-mation communities. The goal is to take atmospheric measurements of different elemental abundances, and use them to calculate the mass fraction and total mass (given planet mass) of each element in the planet. We use a fully-refractory species (currently the best options are S, Fe, Mg, or Si, depending on the location and tem-arXiv:2608.23682v1 [astro-ph.EP] 24 Aug 2026 2perature of the planet) to calculate the amount of solids accreted by the planet. Then, for a specified choice of disk composition (which affects both the amounts of other elements in the solids and the composition of the gas), we calculate the amount of metals accreted from disk gas. This enables us to trace the metals and their enrichment to distinct sources, which in turn pro-vides empirical constraints on different accretion pro-cesses and encourages closer examination of how exactly the metals are accreted. Though a range of choices re-main possible for disk composition, each choice of disk model generates predictions for the relative abundances across multiple planets in the same system and each choice of dominant disk transport physics makes predic-tions for relative abundances in planets across different systems. Degeneracies remain, but our method pegged to refractory accretion is significantly more robust than results obtained solely from C/O ratios. We note from the outset that our formulation yields constraints on composition of the outer well-mixed con-vective layers of planets since their composition is likely to be reflected in the observed part of the atmosphere. This outer convective zone contains a significant frac-tion of a giant planet’s mass and it may grow over time by expanding deeper into zones that are initially stably stratified. In this process, it may entrain more heavy elements from the bottom and make the outer envelope more metal rich (e.g., Vazan et al. 2018; Fuentes & Cum-ming 2020). Given that a negative metallicity gradient (decreasing metallicity with radius) is much more likely than a positive gradient from a formation and stabil-ity standpoint (Helled & Stevenson 2017), our methods would provide lower limits on the metal mass present in the planet. In addition, the presented formalism is best suited to ‘hydrogen-rich atmospheres’ as hydrogen serves as a ref-erence relative to which all other elemental abundances are measured. Although there is not a single precise value at which an atmosphere would no longer be con-sidered hydrogen-rich, a reasonable value to adopt is metal enrichment of ∼ 1000 × that of the star by num-ber relative to hydrogen. For solar composition, this threshold roughly corresponds to half of all the atomic constituents being metals and a metal mass fraction of 0.934. Beyond this metallicity, it would be more appro-priate to employ another abundant element as the base-line. In solar system literature, silicon is often used for this purpose, especially for meteorites, terrestrial plan-ets, and relatively dry bodies (e.g., Lodders et al. 2025). Alternatively, water (oxygen) is utilized as a baseline for reporting the composition of comets and other icy bodies from the outer solar system (e.g., Altwegg et al. 2019). We present the theoretical framework in section 2, which includes methods for linking atmospheric metal-licity to mass fraction, relating composition to planetary building blocks, and estimating the metal mass accreted through different sources. The applications of these methods to planets in the HR 8799 and AF Lep systems are discussed in Section 3. In Section 4, we make con-nections to formation and interior models and present a novel constraint on the minimum disk mass needed to form a planet based on the amount of metals accreted via metal-enriched gas. In Section 5, we conclude with some thoughts on the future applicability of this frame-work. The methods laid out in this work are provided in the form of an open-source code repository called 

accomp at https://github.com/y-chachan/accomp.  

> 2.

THEORETICAL BASICS 2.1. Relation between atmospheric metallicity and metal mass fraction 

Atmospheric elemental abundances are primarily re-ported in terms of the number fraction with respect to hydrogen (or another baseline element) of a given ele-ment normalized to solar or stellar number fraction of that element. To convert this number fraction to mass fraction, one typically assumes a mean molecular weight for the metals and H-He and then converts number frac-tion to mass fraction (Fortney et al. 2013; Thorngren & Fortney 2019). Here, we present a novel approach that is simpler and more generalizable compared to the prior method. Let ni be the number density of a given el-ement, nH be the number density of H. The number fraction of element i is given by 

χi = ni

nH

. (1) If xi is the atmospheric metallicity of element a reported as xi× stellar, then xi is related to χi by: 

xi ≡ χi,p 

χi,⋆ 

= ni,p 

ni,⋆ 

nH,⋆ 

nH,p 

, (2) where the subscripts p and ⋆ refer to the planet and star, respectively. The Sun’s abundance is typically reported as the log (base 10) of each element’s ni, with log( nH ) = 12 specified for H. We can convert the number fraction of a species to its mass fraction relative to H as follows: 

Zi

X = Aini

AH nH

, (3) where Zi and Ai are the mass fraction (i.e., fraction of the total mass) and atomic mass of element i, and X3and AH are the mass fraction and atomic mass of H. Given that ( Zi/X )⋆ is known apriori, we can directly relate the number fraction of a species in a planet to its mass fraction relative to H (Zi/X )p = ( Zi/X )⋆xi. (4) The total mass fraction of metals relative to H is then just a summation over all elements (Z/X )p = X

> i

(Zi/X )⋆xi. (5) Consider first a planet that is uniformly enriched in all elements relative to the Sun such that xi = x. Its metal mass fraction relative to H would therefore be (Z/X )p = ( Z/X )⊙x ≃ 0.0187 x, (6) where the numerical value is taken from Asplund et al. (2021). The numerical coefficient is recognizable as sim-ilar to the ≈1.4% total metal fraction by mass at solar metallicity, though note that Equation (6) uses ratio of the metal mass to the mass in hydrogen, not the fraction of the total mass in metals. The fraction of the total mass consisting of hydrogen is 

X = (1 − Z)X′, (7) where X′ is the H mass fraction of metal-free material (i.e., H and He). This reformulation leads to a simple relationship between Z/X and ZZX = Z

(1 − Z)X′ , (8) where X′ is calculated from the adopted stellar abun-dance (e.g., X′ = 0 .754 from Asplund et al. 2021) in both the planet and the star under the assumption that H and He have not fractionated. This assumption may break down for atmospheres that are marginally hydro-gen poor (e.g., Hu et al. 2015; Cherubim et al. 2024) but is expected to be robust for hydrogen-dominated atmo-spheres, including most or all giant planets. Plugging Equation (8), applied to the planet, into Equation (6) provides a direct relationship between the atmospheric metallicity x and the mass fraction of metals: 

Zp = (Z/X )⊙xX ′

1 + ( Z/X )⊙xX ′ = x

(1 − Z⊙)/Z ⊙ + x ≃ x

70 + x ,

(9) where we have used Equation (7) and Z⊙ = 0 .014 (As-plund et al. 2021). The inverse relationship is 

x = Zp(1 − Z⊙)

Z⊙(1 − Zp) ≃ 70 

 Zp

1 − Zp



. (10)                      

> Element (Zi/Z )⊙(%) Asplund et al. (2021) Lodders et al. (2025) O41.6 42.0 C18.4 17.7 Ne 12.3 13.0 Fe 8.56 8.24 N5.03 6.10 Si 4.83 4.65 Mg 4.58 4.21 S2.25 2.11
> Table 1. The fraction of the total metal mass contained in different elements in the Sun based on the abundance in Asplund et al. (2021) and Lodders et al. (2025), in descending order. The elements listed here make up 97.6% and 98.0% of of the total mass of metals in the Sun for Asplund et al. (2021) and Lodders et al. (2025), respectively.

These expressions can be used to quickly estimate x from 

Zp and vice versa. Similar arguments can be applied for the mass fraction of a given element rather than all the metals (equivalent to replacing Z with Zi in equations above). For stellar compositions that differ from that of the Sun, one ought to replace Z⊙ with Z⋆.If the enrichment of different elements is different, as generally expected, the more general expression in Equa-tion 5 should be employed. It is instructive to rewrite Equation 5 by multiplying and dividing the right hand side by ( Z/X )⋆

(Z/X )p = ( Z/X )⋆

X

> i

(Zi/Z )⋆xi. (11) The term in the summation now depends only on the mass in element i as a fraction of the total metal mass for the star. This is a fixed quantity for any given star. Table 1 lists ( Zi/Z )⋆ for metals that make up the vast majority of the metal mass in the Sun. Oxygen and carbon alone constitute 60% of the total metal mass. It is useful to define a mass-fraction averaged enrichment ¯x

¯x = X

> i

(Zi/Z )⋆xi (12) The bulk metallicity for the more general case of differ-ent enrichment can then be obtained by: 

Zp = ¯x

(1 − Z⋆)/Z ⋆ + ¯ x . (13) For the Sun, the first term in the denominator is again 

∼ 70. For uniform enrichment, this expression simpli-fies to Equation 9. Let us consider a specific example to show the utility of this expression. Consider a planet that is 10 × solar enriched in O but solar in all the other 4elements. Since O contains 41.6% of metals by mass, Equation 12 yields ¯ x = 10 × 0.416 + (1 − 0.416) = 4 .74 and Equation 13 yields Zp = 0 .063. Compare this with a planet that is uniformly enriched in all metals at the 10 × solar level with Zp = 0 .124. Another utility of this relation is that one can estimate the enrichment re-quired for different elements to obtain the same metal mass fraction. All one has to ensure is that ¯ x is the same even though different elements may be contribut-ing to the sum in the right hand side of Equation 12. For example, the O enrichment required to match the metal mass fraction for a 10 × solar uniformly enriched atmosphere is 10 /(0 .416) = 24 × solar. We note that the approach outlined in this section is considerably easier to use compared to assuming a mean molecular weight for H-He and metals and using the number fraction to obtain mass fraction. Our approach also has the advantage of easily accommodating different levels of enrichment for different elements. 2.2. Composition of planetary building blocks 

How is the composition of a planetary envelope related to its building blocks? To answer this question, it is helpful to separate elements that are accreted solely via solids (refractories) from those that are accreted both from solids and gas (volatiles). Refractory elements pro-vide a critical link in this framework by providing an unambiguous tracer of solid accretion (Lothringer et al. 2021; Chachan et al. 2023). Which elements can be treated as refractory depends on the context of a planet’s formation location. For close-in planets, species such as Fe, Mg, and Si can safely be considered refractory while the case of S is more equivocal. For giant planets at a few to tens of au, S is a useful tracer of refractories (Kama et al. 2019). Depending on the assumed formation location and the relative position of volatile snowlines, a part of the volatile elements will be in the solids. So the accretion of solids will bring in all the refractories but they will also deliver some volatile elements. Let us consider two elements, a refractory R and a volatile V species, for demonstration. Note that for our purposes, an element is considered “volatile” if a significant fraction of the atom is present in volatile molecules. For example, O is counted as volatile even though silicates contain sub-stantial oxygen because a large fraction of O is found in H 2O, CO, and CO 2. The calculations below can eas-ily be generalized to more elements. Let xR and xV be their respective enrichment in a planet relative to that of the host star. Finally, let fi,s be the fraction of el-ement i that is present in disk solids. This fraction is calculated under the assumption that the total amount of each species is given by the overall disk abundance, scaled to the abundance of hydrogen. In practice, stellar abundances are used to approximate the average abun-dances in the disk. In the static picture where metals in solids and gas are not radially redistributed, fR,s = 1 for the refractory species and 0 ≤ fV,s ≤ 1 for the volatile species, depending on the formation location and ther-mal processing of solids. The volatile and refractory enrichment are therefore related by 

xV = xRfV,s + (1 − fV,s ). (14) For example, for O, fV,s ≈ 1 outside the CO snowline, 

fV,s ≈ 0.25 inside the water snowline (primarily in sili-cates), with intermediate numbers in between. Interior to the water snowline, the enhancement of O, xV , is the sum of xV,s = xRfV,s from silicates and xV,g = (1 −fV,s )from H 2O, CO, and CO 2 gas. We note that in this ex-ample, more refractory enhancement leads to propor-tionally more provision of O in silicates, but no similar factor is provided in the gas enhancement term. This is because disk hydrogen is assumed to accrete along with the volatiles and abundances in the final planet atmo-sphere are measured with respect to hydrogen. However, disks are not static and metals get redis-tributed due to pebble drift and evaporation, viscous evolution, and disk mass loss ( ¨Oberg & Bergin 2016; Booth et al. 2017). To account for these effects, we need an additional parameter that is controlled by these pro-cesses. If the disk gas has an enrichment that differs from 1 − fV,s , then gV,excess can capture this difference. Alternatively, processes such as outward diffusion of va-por at snowlines could deposit volatiles on the solids be-yond the snowline and change the volatile content of the solids to fV,s + sV,excess . Equation 14 is then modified as follows 

xV = xR(fV,s + sV,excess ) + (1 − fV,s ) + gV,excess . (15) For elements distributed among multiple volatile molecules, excess terms of both types in Equation 15 may be present. However, to keep the number of free parameters in check while making compositional infer-ences, it is reasonable to only use one of these excess terms depending on the context of the planetary sys-tem. In this work and the accompanying code, we spec-ify the enhancement in volatile abundance interior or exterior to its snowline relative to the stellar elemental abundance of one of the elements present in the volatile. For example, specifying that the disk gas is n× stellar enriched in CO inside the CO snowline and that the ref-erence element is C implies that the excess C/H (i.e., not including local gas phase C computed under the assump-5tion of no redistribution) in the disk gas is n× stellar 2.This sets gV,excess = n for C. Recall that gV,excess (and similarly sV,excess ) is the ratio (by number) of the ex-cess element to hydrogen expressed as a fraction of this ratio for the star. So though CO enrichment adds the same number of C and O atoms, it does not produce the same gV,excess for both. The corresponding gV,excess 

for O in the above example would be n × (C /O) ⋆. In inner regions of disks where multiple volatile molecules might have sublimated and enriched the disk gas, we can specify the enrichment and reference element for each molecule and gV,excess or sV,excess would then be determined by the sum of all the different volatile en-richments that contribute to any given element. These expressions show that these compositional rela-tions are identical for stars of different compositions as long as the fractional distribution of volatile fV,s is not dependent on stellar composition. For a more detailed discussion of fV,s and the values it takes for oxygen and carbon in different parts of the disk, we refer the reader to Chachan et al. (2023). 2.3. Estimating metal mass accreted from solids and gas 

We can use the relations developed above to relate metal mass fraction and enrichment as well as the quan-tify the amount of metals accumulated via different sources. Continuing with the R and V species consid-ered above, the total mass fraction-averaged enrichment ¯x is ¯x = xR(ZR/Z )⋆ + xV (ZV /Z )⋆. (16) Equation 13 can then be used to calculate the metal mass fraction Zp from ¯ x of the planet. To estimate the amount of metals accreted from dif-ferent sources (e.g., solids, gas), we first calculate the mass-averaged enrichment from a particular source ¯ x[j].We first limit ourselves to the case of a static disk in which all the elements locally add up to stellar values. For elements accreted through solids, the mass-averaged enrichment ¯ xs is given by ¯xs = xR[( ZR/Z )⋆ + fV,s (ZV /Z )⋆], (17) i.e., the sum of refractories xR(ZR/Z )⋆ and the volatiles that come along with solids xV,s = xRfV,s . Locally, we would expect the disk gas to have an enrichment of (1 − fV,s )× solar for the volatile V. The contribution of the local gas to the mass-fraction averaged enrichment   

> 2Note that because this enhancement refers only to the excess, in this context 0 ×stellar corresponds to no enrichment and 1 ×
> stellar is enriched.

would be ¯xg = (1 − fV,s )( ZV /Z )⋆. (18) The total contribution of the solids and the local gas to the planet’s volatile enrichment is xV,s + 1 − fV,s =(xR − 1) fV,s + 1 (see Equation 14). If the measured enrichment of the volatile species 

xV > (xR − 1) fV,s + 1, then the planet must have accreted volatiles beyond what we would expect from a static disk picture. In other words, the amount of solid material accreted is constrained by the planet’s refractory elements and the amount of gas accreted is constrained by the planet’s hydrogen, putting an up-per limit on the accretion of volatile elements in the absence of disk redistribution. This excess enrichment is the difference between the measured volatile enrich-ment and the enrichment expected in a static disk model 

xV − [( xR − 1) fV,s + 1]. The mass-fraction averaged en-richment from this excess volatile accretion is ¯xexcess = [( xV − 1) − (xR − 1) fV,s ]( ZV /Z )⋆. (19) The excess volatile mass informs us about the metal re-distribution processes in protoplanetary disks. For ex-ample, if the excess volatiles are accreted from metal-enriched gas due to pebble drift and evaporation, then 

gV,excess tells us about the level of enrichment of this gas (see Equation 15). Similarly, sV,excess would indicate the excess enrichment of the solids if these volatiles came from solids just beyond the volatile’s snowline that were enriched due to outward diffusion and condensation. To calculate the contribution of a given metal source to the bulk metallicity, we have to use 

Zp, [j] = ¯x[j]

¯x Zp. (20) This ensures that the bulk metallicity contributions of all the different sources add up to the bulk metallicity corresponding to the total enrichment. We cannot use Equation 13 to estimate the bulk metallicity contribu-tion of a particular metal source as this relation is non-linear and does not follow the additivity relation, i.e., 

Zp(¯ xs) + Zp(¯ xg ) + Zp(¯ xexcess )̸ = Zp(¯ xs + ¯ xg + ¯ xexcess ). Equivalently, the excess contribution can be calculated using Zp, excess = Zp − Zp,s − Zp,g , where Equation 13 is used to calculate Zp, and Equation 20 is used to calcu-late Zp,s and Zp,g , yielding Zp, excess = (¯ xexcess /¯x)Zp.Using the atmospheric abundances of a planet to quantify the mass of metals accreted from different sources provides a powerful probe of the planet’s for-mation and accretion history. Using the volatile and refractory enrichment, we can deduce the sources of the metals. These enrichment measurements can then be converted into the mass of metals accreted by the planet 6from these different sources. Having a handle on the mass of the metals enables a closer link to protoplane-tary disk and formation models. Our procedure does not obviate the need for a model of the processes that can redistribute volatiles, producing gV,excess and sV,excess 

terms, but it provides a straightforward way to deter-mine whether the data requires such redistribution and to constrain which redistribution scenarios are sufficient and/or allowed. By comparing the implied composition of a planet’s building blocks with the expected solid and gas composition at the planet’s location, we can also deduce whether the planet’s measured composition suggests migration from its formation location. In the outer regions of protoplanetary disks, the composition of building blocks can be similar over large distances because of the slow decline in temperature with orbital distance. However, migration is more likely to be im-portant for the interpretation of composition of close-in giant planets.  

> 3.

EXAMPLE APPLICATIONS The above framework has been applied to observations from two directly-imaged planetary systems thus far— HR 8799 (Xuan et al. 2026) and AF Lep b (Xuan et al. 2026) with interesting results. In each of these works, atmospheric retrievals yield the abundances of elements relative to those of their host star (i.e., the xi values for different elements as defined in Equation 2). In (Xuan et al. 2026) and (Xuan et al. 2026), stellar abundances were assumed to be those of the Sun because the stars’ moving groups have abundances compatible with solar composition. Both AF Lep b and the four directly imaged gi-ant planets orbiting HR 8799 are distant enough from their host stars that sulfur may be treated as refractory (Kama et al. (2019), see Xuan et al. 2026; Xuan et al. 2026 for further discussion), so we take xR in Equation (14) to be the abundance of S. Abundances, xV , of two volatile species are available for all of these planets: C and O. HR 8799 b also has a measured abundance of N. We first test the feasibility of the simplest type of disk model under consideration—one in which no redistribu-tion of volatiles occurs. We solve for fV,s for each of C and O using Equation (14), where xV is the measured abundance of C or O and xR is the measured abundance of S. For AF Lep b, we find that this simple model is sufficient. For O, fV,s = 0 .73 +0 .22 

> −0.16

, compatible with allo-cation of ∼75% of the element in solid silicates and H 2Oice and ∼25% in gaseous CO, and CO 2. This allocation of oxygen is compatible with disk models at the planet’s orbital distance of 9 au that partition molecular com-ponents into solids and gas without redistribution (e.g., Chachan et al. 2023). For C, fV,s = 0 .51 +0 .18 

> −0.13

. A non-redistributive disk model thus requires that a substantial portion of the refractory carbon stays in the solids at the planet’s location. The disk location at which refractory organics, known to host about half of the carbon in the interstellar medium (Mishra & Li 2015), sublimate is not well understood, but retention of this material in solids at 9 au is compatible with current constraints (e.g. Gail & Trieloff 2017; Dartois et al. 2018). Application of Equation (14) to the three inner HR 8799 planets, in contrast, yields fV,s > 1 for C and O, indicating that volatile redistribution is required. For the outermost planet, fV,s ∼ 1 for C and O, suggesting that these volatiles are fully condensed out into solids, and fV,s > 1 for N, again indicating the need for volatile redistribution. Motivated by the location of the planets between the predicted locations of their natal disk’s CO 2

and N 2 snowlines, we next apply Equation (15) with a non-zero value for gV,excess . We set sV,excess = 0. Disk models indicate that pebbles may drift inward across snowlines, where their volatile material sublimates, en-riching gas within the snowline locations (e.g., ¨Oberg & Bergin 2016; Booth et al. 2017). Spatially resolved ob-servational evidence for enrichment of disk gas in CO inside the CO snowline in disks remains equivocal. For three disks around Sun-like stars, (Zhang et al. 2021) re-port no such enrichment. For two disks around A stars (HD 163296 and MWC 480), observations suggest in-ner disks are enriched in CO but that this enrichment is likely centrally-peaked rather than just inside the CO snowline (Bosman et al. 2021; Armitage et al. 2026). However, these conclusions depend on comparisons with detailed disk chemical models and differences in model assumptions can significantly alter the inferred CO gas phase abundance (Pascucci et al. 2023). Nonetheless, 

JWST observations of inner disks reveal water rich disk gas that broadly support the importance of radial pebble drift and evaporation in redistributing volatiles in pro-toplanetary disks (Banzatti et al. 2023; Romero-Mirza et al. 2024). We note that HR 8799 is an A star, like those disks for which CO enhancement interior to the snowline has been observed. If typical disks orbiting G- and A-stars experience different amounts of CO re-distribution through pebble drift, our model applied to future planetary atmosphere observations will provide a method to probe this difference, complementary to di-rect observations of disk gas. In the case of HR 8799, the most pertinent snowlines are those for CO and N 2. Interior to each snowline lo-cation, we require that gas enrichment gV,excess occur in proportions consistent with sublimated gas. In other words, since C and O only sublimate in the form of CO, 7the model’s self-consistency requires that gV,excess for both elements is set by the enrichment of CO in the disk gas, while the value of gV,excess for N may vary indepen-dently (see note below about how N 2 and CO enrichment of disk gas might be related). For simplicity, we assume that volatile enhancement interior to each snowline is uniform in space. This assumption may be incorrect, particularly early in the disk’s lifetime when diffusion has not had the opportunity to fully mix the region. However, we find that taking this effect into account is not needed to match the HR 8799 data. We note that for planets located closer to their host stars, interior to sev-eral separate snowlines, a more complicated disk model is needed to determine the expected relative values for 

gV,excess for different elements. This complication is not required to model observed abundances in the HR 8799 planets, but models of this behavior are available in the literature (e.g., Booth et al. 2017; Schneider & Bitsch 2021; Ohno et al. 2026). Interestingly, the composition of all three inner HR 8799 planets is compatible with the same level of CO enrichment of 3 × solar defined using C as the reference atom (i.e., excess C/H = 3 × solar), yielding gV,excess ∼ 3for C and gV,excess ∼ 3 × (C /O) ⋆ ∼ 1.65 for O. This as-sumes that all of C and O enrichment is coming from CO given that the planets are within the CO snowline but beyond the CO 2 snowline. This consistency makes a simple model consisting of CO enrichment due to pebble drift across the CO snowline very compelling. The out-ermost planet’s N abundance puts a looser constraint 

gV,excess ∼ 10 − 30 for N, primarily due to the effects of disequilibrium chemistry and partly due to this cold planet’s dimness. The requisite enrichment of CO and N2 are reasonable according to numerical disk evolution models that account for pebble drift and evaporation (Booth et al. 2017; Schneider & Bitsch 2021). The mea-sured composition implies that the outermost planet was likely between the CO and N 2 snowlines while the inner three planets were within the CO snowline (Xuan et al. 2026). Strikingly, the formation location of the planets implied by their composition is compatible with their positions relative to the estimated location of the CO and N 2 snowlines (55 and 80 au, respectively) in this system, suggesting that large scale migration is not re-quired to explain their compositions. Moreover, the enrichment of CO and N 2 in the disk gas are expected to be different but interrelated as they de-pend on the same underlying total amount of solids that have drifted past the snowlines and lost their volatiles. By default, we assume that 40% of C is contained in CO (with the rest in solids) and 60% of N is contained in N 2.A 3 × solar enrichment of CO in the disk gas would there-fore suggest an N enrichment of 0 .6/0.4 × 3 = 4 .5× solar under the assumption that the CO and N 2 snowlines are close enough together that the cumulative mass of pebbles that drifted through each is similar. This ratio is compatible with the measurements at the 1 .9 σ level. However, the exact proportion of C and N in CO and N2 respectively is somewhat uncertain and for a larger amount of N is in N 2 (∼ 70 − 80%) and a lower amount of C is in CO ( ∼ 20%), the inferred disk gas enrichment would be compatible with a single value of the integrated pebble mass that has drifted past the CO and N 2 snow-lines. A more precise measurement of N abundance in the outermost planet as well as N measurements for the inner three planets would allow a powerful test of the pebble drift and evaporation hypothesis.  

> 4.

CONNECTIONS TO PROTOPLANETARY DISK AND FORMATION MODELS Using the measured enrichment of metals in a plan-etary atmosphere, we can estimate the planet’s metal mass fraction ( Zp, Equation 13) and the absolute metal mass ( Zp × Mp) if abundances of a sufficient number of elements are available. These estimates assume that the atmospheric metallicity is representative of a planet’s bulk metallicity and the contribution of the core to the metallicity is small. This is a reasonable assumption for massive giant planets ( ≳ 1 MJ), especially if they have metal enriched envelopes, as the envelope can contain much more metals than a 10 − 15 M ⊕ core. In general, we expect atmospheric metallicity to be a lower limit on the bulk metallicity. Often, all the elemental species needed to make these estimates are not available. In this case, it is useful to make some reasonable assump-tions about the enrichment expected for other important elements that matter for metal mass estimation. In par-ticular, for some of the cooler giants, only S might be observable as a tracer for refractories. Given that Fe, Mg, and Si also trace refractories and contain a large fraction of the metal mass (Table 1), we can assume that their abundance is the same as S to obtain a more comprehensive estimate of the metal mass accreted by a planet. For unmeasured volatile elements such as Ne and sometimes N, the assumed abundance depends on the purpose of the calculation and a reasonable start-ing point could be to assume that xi = 0 (absent from the planet) or 1 (enriched at the stellar level) for these elements. We used the measured C, O, and S abundances for the HR 8799 planets and AF Lep b (and also N abun-dance for HR 8799 b) to place constraints on these plan-ets’ metal mass fraction and absolute metal mass (Xuan et al. 2026; Xuan et al. 2026). We assume xi = 0 for 8missing volatiles to obtain a conservative estimate of the metal mass fraction. The enrichment of Fe, Mg, and Si is set equal to that of S. The bulk metallicity for each planet is then calculated using Equations 12 and 13. The atmospheric compositions of the HR 8799 plan-ets indicate that the planets are 3 − 7% metal by mass (the range is narrower for individual planets). Given their large masses, metal mass fractions of this range map to 70 − 120 M⊕ of metals in each planet with a cumulative total of 412 +48  

> −43

M⊕ in all four planets. Simi-larly, AF Lep b has a comparable metal mass fraction of 

∼ 4%, which translates to 56 ± 7 M⊕ of metals given its slightly lower mass. These estimates hint at the enor-mous amount of metals contained in super-Jupiters and they are commensurate with the enriched (3 .3 ± 0.5×

relative to the host stars) bulk metallicities inferred for transiting super-Jupiters (Chachan et al. 2025a), even though these populations might have formed in different regions of their protoplanetary disks. The metallicity estimates obtained from atmospheric composition also demonstrate that for this class of planets, most metals are likely contained in their envelopes and not in their 10 − 15 M⊕ cores, in agreement with the assumption we made above. A giant planet’s bulk metallicity Zp, bulk can also be es-timated by using thermal evolution models to match the planet’s observed mass, radius, and age (Guillot et al. 2006; Thorngren et al. 2016; Chachan et al. 2025a). This technique works best for mature ( ≳ Gyr old) planets with precise measurements of their bulk properties. It is therefore not as successfully applicable to directly im-aged planets as they tend to be young (the choice of ini-tial entropy strongly affects bulk metallicity inferences) and their masses and radii typically have large uncer-tainties. The difference between the bulk metallicity and the atmospheric metallicity is often used to estimate the core mass of a giant planet 

Mcore = ( Zp, bulk − Zp, atm ) Mp. (21) In reality, estimation of Zp, bulk from thermal evolution models assumes a certain metallicity for the atmosphere, which in turn controls the planet’s thermal evolution by setting the cooling rate of the planet. Therefore, once a planet’s atmospheric metallicity Zp, atm has been measured, one should re-derive its bulk metallicity self-consistently using thermal evolution models that ac-count for the measured atmospheric metallicity. We note that compositional gradients in the interior might lead to the deeper envelope having a larger metal mass fraction than the atmosphere. This simple estimate of the core mass therefore provides an upper limit on its value. Our framework allows us to go beyond a measurement of the total metal mass fraction alone. By inferring how refractory and volatile abundances are related and the sources of the metals in a planet’s atmosphere (following the exercise in Section 3), we can separate out the mass of metals accreted via solids and gas. This proves espe-cially powerful for relating observed atmospheric com-position to formation models. The enrichment of a giant planet’s envelope by solids ( xR) provides an important empirical measure of the extent of solid accretion dur-ing runaway accretion, which is hard to predict theo-retically. If xR ∼ 1, then the solids might have been accreted in the form of small dust grains that were dy-namically well-coupled to the gas. Enhancements in xR

imply more efficient accretion of solids beyond this sim-ple expectation. The absolute metal mass accreted from solids can be estimated as Ms = Zp,s Mp, where Zp,s is calculated using Equations 20 and 17. With this esti-mate in hand, we can compare it to expectations from accretion of solids in common paradigms. Giant planets may accumulate solids via (1) a solid core formed prior to the onset of runaway gas accretion, (2) accumulation of solids entrained in disk gas as part of the runaway gas accretion process, or (3) accretion of solids during or after runaway accretion. A growing solid core accumulates an atmosphere prior to the on-set of runaway gas accretion, and the physics of solid accretion is modified once this atmosphere is present. However, the total mass in such a core + atmosphere must be less than twice the solid core mass to avoid runaway gas accretion, so for rhetorical simplicity, we include solids accreted during this phase in (1). We consider each phase in turn. (1) Whether solids added to a giant planet in the form of what was originally a solid core can be dredged up into the convective region of the planet’s envelope and contribute to the observed atmospheric metallicity re-mains unclear (Guillot et al. 2004; Helled et al. 2022). As already noted, our calculations do not take into ac-count metals that remain in a sequestered core at the time that the planet’s atmosphere is observed. We re-view several models for the original accretion of a core to study the consistency of observed metal masses with pol-lution by core dredging. Growing planetary cores may accrete solids in the form of planetesimals ( ∼ 1 − 100 km) that are available within the planet’s feeding zone (i.e., gravitational region of influence): 

Mpls ,fz = (2 πr )(2∆)Σ pls , (22) where r is the planet’s semi-major axis, Σ pls is the plan-etesimal surface density, and ∆ is the extent of the planet’s feeding zone often characterized as a multiple 9(typically 3 .5 × RH , Lissauer 1993) of the planet’s Hill radius ( RH = r(Mp/3M⋆)1/3). In the absence of gas ac-cretion and considering planetesimal accretion only, one obtains the classic planetesimal isolation mass 

Mpls ,iso =



4π ∆

RH

1(3 M⋆)1/3 Σpls r2

3/2

. (23) This isolation limit exists because the feeding zone of a growing planet increases only as M 1/3 

> p

. We expect the planetesimal surface density to decline with with semi-major axis, and using the minimum mass solar nebula (MMSN, Σ pls = 33 ( r/ 1 au) −3/2 g cm −2) from Chiang & Youdin (2010) to obtain a and Mpls ,iso , we get 

Mpls ,iso ≈ 2.3 n3/2MMSN 

 r

10 au 

3/4

 ∆/R H

3.5

3/2 M⋆

M⊙

−1/2

M⊕. (24) The factor nMMSN modulates the planetesimal surface density relative to the MMSN value and q = Mp/M ⋆ is the planet-to-star mass ratio. Solids may also be accreted by a growing solid core in the form of mm-cm sized pebbles. Pebbles are marginally coupled to the disk gas and the effect of gas drag greatly enhances a growing planet’s ability to cap-ture them as they drift past it. Gas-assisted growth can only operate within the planet’s Hill radius, where the planet’s gravity dominates over stellar tidal gravity and reduction of relative velocity between a pebble and the planet can cause the pebble to become gravitationally bound. Hence, this process is most effective for cores with Hill radii, RH , smaller than the scale height of the gas disk, Hg , so that the full potential accretion cross section is embedded in protoplanetary disk gas. This criterion corresponds to masses less than the thermal mass (e.g., Lin & Papaloizou 1986; Chametla & Masset 2021), 

Mth = M∗

 Hg

r

3

. (25) The accretion of pebbles is thought to be a self-limiting process for two reasons. First, it depends on the inward radial drift of pebbles, which can significantly slow down when a planet becomes massive enough to perturb the disk gas and change its structure, though see Zhu et al. (2012); Stammler et al. (2023); Huang et al. (2025) for a contrary view. This happens roughly when the planet’s mass becomes comparable to Mth . Bitsch et al. (2018) provide an expression for the “pebble isola-tion mass” encoding this process that includes the effect of disk turbulence parametrized by αt and pressure gra-dient ( γ = ∂ ln P/∂ ln r): 

Mpebble ,iso = 25 

 M⋆

M⊙

 Hg/r 

0.05 

3



0.34 

 −3log 10 (αt)

4

+ 0 .66 

 

1 −

 γ + 2 .56

 

M⊕.

(26) Second, pebble accretion is expected to be “flow lim-ited” when the small solids available for accretion are so well coupled to disk gas that they flow around the core rather than decoupling and accreting onto the planet. Recall that during the epoch of solid core growth, even when the core has accumulated a gas atmosphere, atmo-spheric growth is slow and does not involve a fast inflow of gas into the bound atmosphere (circulation flows as in Ormel et al. 2015; Cimerman et al. 2017 may be present, but the gas in these flows does not remain bound). Solid particles fully coupled to the gas on the timescale of local gas flows do not accrete onto the planet. The “flow isolation mass” (Rosenthal et al. 2018; Rosenthal & Murray-Clay 2020), above which no avail-able pebbles are able to accrete is 

Mflow ,iso = M∗

 Hg

r

3

min 



f 2 cs

vgas 

St max , f 3/2St 1/2max 



(27) where vgas = ( η2v2 

> K

+ αtc2

> s

)1/2 is the root-mean-square velocity of the disk gas relative to the local Keplerian velocity vK , η = −γc 2

> s

/(2 v2 

> K

) is a measure of radial pressure support in the disk gas, cs is the local isother-mal sound speed, f is an order-unity constant, and 

St max ≲ 1 is the Stokes number corresponding to the largest “pebbles” available for accretion. 3 The various regimes captured in Equation (27) result from the im-portance of the relative velocity between the growing core and disk gas at the location of the pebble, which may be dominated by radial pressure support in the disk, gas turbulence, or Keplerian shear. For St max ∼ 1, Mflow ,iso ∼ Mpebble ,iso ∼ Mth to order of magnitude, though the order unity coefficients (best calibrated by numerical experiments) can differ. Inter-estingly, flow isolation blocks accretion of small pebbles most effectively while pebble isolation blocks accretion of large pebbles most effectively, and these processes may work in concert to block accretion of most or all solids at masses comparable to the thermal mass, even if pebble traps at the edges of gaps opened in disks    

> 3In the Epstein and Stokes drag regimes, the gas drag stopping time and its dimensionless equivalent, St , are independent of the relative velocity between the particle and the gas. We assume this regime for calculations in this paper. See Rosenthal & Murray-Clay (2020) for appropriate velocities in the ram pressure regime, which can dominate in the inner disk.

10 by giant planets are leaky. The biggest difference be-tween pebble and flow isolation, however, happens when 

St max < 1, either due to vigorous fragmentation of solids due to turbulence in the inner disk or where, in the outer disk, particle growth balanced by inward drift prevents growth to large Stokes numbers. In these cases, flow isolation is expected to limit the growth of solid cores before they can reach the pebble isolation mass. In this work, we set St max as the minimum of Stokes number set by fragmentation St frag = v2frag /3αtc2 

> s

and radial drift 

St drift = δv 2K/|γ|c2

> s

, where vfrag is the fragmentation ve-locity of dust grains and δ is the dust-to-gas mass ratio of the disk (Birnstiel et al. 2012). These choices for the fragmentation and drift limits assume that particle rel-ative velocities are dominated by turbulent motion, gas drag occurs in the Epstein drag regime, and α < St < 1, all of which are broadly reasonable in outer regions of protoplanetary disks. (2) Very small solids that are cou-pled to the protoplanetary disk gas on the timescale of gas infall onto a planet undergoing runaway gas accre-tion may be accumulated directly by the planet as part of the gas accretion process. In this case, dust and suffi-ciently small “pebbles” are accreted in direct proportion to the amount of gas accreted—in other words, the ra-tio of the atmosphere’s mass in accumulated solids to its mass in hydrogen is equal to the ratio (including only small solids) present in the disk. (3) Giant planets may accrete solid planetesimals ( ∼

1 − 100 km) during or after runaway gas accretion, as long as these solids are available within the planet’s final 

feeding zone (Pollack et al. 1996). This feeding zone is set by Equation (22), applied to the planet’s final mass Mp, which includes both solids and its massive gas envelope (Thorngren et al. 2016). We note that the giant planet’s final mass is not determined by Equation (23) because gas accretion is thought to be limited by gap opening (e.g., Lissauer 1993; Lissauer et al. 2009; Rosenthal et al. 2020). Nevertheless, solid planetesimals large enough to dynamically decouple from the disk gas can be accreted from throughout the feeding zone in Equation (22). Using the same minimum mass solar nebula model applied in Equation (24, we calculate a fiducial value for the mass in planetesimals accreted from the feeding zone, Mpls ,fz , of 

Mpls ,fz ≈ 12 nMMSN 

 r

10 au 

1/2

 ∆3.5 RH

 q

10 −3

1/3

M⊕. (28) Each of these baseline expectations can be compared with the amount of solid mass accreted by planets esti-mated through our framework. Future changes to these paradigms and additional models of solid accretion can be easily incorporated into our code and provide points of comparison between theoretical expectations and em-pirical estimates of solid accretion. For AF Lep b, the measured C, O, and S abundances suggest that nearly all of the 56 ± 7 M⊕ of metals were accreted via solids (Xuan et al. 2026). This metal mass comfortably exceeds the classical planetesimal isolation mass ∼ 1.9 M⊕ (nMMSN = 1, and M⋆ = 1 .2 M⊙), flow isolation mass ∼ 5.3 M⊕ (vfrag = 3 m/s, slightly evolved dust-to-gas ratio δ = 10 −3 appropriate for ∼ 1 Myr, fragmentation dominates for r ≲ 40 au given this choice of the uncertain quantity vfrag , f = 1 .75), and pebble isolation mass ∼ 17 M⊕ (αt = 3 × 10 −4 and disk ther-mal structure from Ida et al. 2016 and Chachan & Lee 2023, adopted for flow isolation as well) at the planet’s current location of 9 au. If the planet was enriched by accretion of small solids that were entrained by accret-ing gas during runaway, the required enrichment of these small solids would be 4 .7±0.7× stellar, i.e., the observed enrichment of refractory species represented by S. If in-stead the planet accreted these solids in the form of plan-etesimals at its present location, the required planetesi-mal surface density would be nMMSN = 4 × the MMSN, assuming the planet accretes everything in the feeding zone at its final mass (Equation 28). However, for single planet systems, it is harder to ascertain the planetary system architecture during formation and as a result, it is difficult to overcome degeneracies (e.g., with forma-tion location) in these inferences. The true power of comparing estimated solid mass with expectations from formation models lies in multi-planet systems because they allow us to study trends in accreted solid mass as a function of semi-major axis. For HR 8799, we found that the planets show an in-creasing trend of accreted solid mass with semi-major axis (Xuan et al. 2026). The classic planetesimal isola-tion mass and flow isolation mass are too small to match the observed solid accretion. However, this trend is in quantitative agreement with both planetesimal accre-tion in a nMMSN = 2 × MMSN disk (Equation 28) and the expected pebble isolation mass for a disk around HR 8799 with properties typical of disks around simi-lar stars. Given that both AF Lep and HR 8799 are more massive than the Sun and the expectation that disk mass is positively correlated with stellar mass, the inferred nMMSN is reasonable for planetesimal surface density expected in these systems. We note that if solid accretion for the HR 8799 planets’ is due to pebble isola-11 tion, it does not entail that extremely efficient mixing of the solid core is required for us to detect the signature of this solid accretion in the envelope. Even modest mass cores ( ∼ 1 M⊕) have primordial envelopes in which peb-bles ablate and deposit metals that can then be mixed up into the outer convective layer (Brouwers et al. 2018). Observational constraints on excess metals accreted by a planet provide an additional lower limit on the disk solid mass assuming that the disk gas is enriched by evaporation of the volatile from radially drifting peb-bles or disk solids are enriched due to the outward dif-fusion of evaporated volatile and its recondensation be-yond the snowline. This calculation is similar in spirit to an equivalent calculation using the measured CO en-hancement within the CO snowlines of disks (Williams & Krijt 2025). If fV,[mol] is the fraction of a given element contained in the molecule that evaporates at the relevant snowline, then fV,[mol] (ZV /Z )⋆ is the frac-tion of a pebble’s mass that evaporates at the snow-line. If there are multiple elements present in the evap-orating volatile, then we need to sum their contribu-tion P 

> V

fV,[mol] (ZV /Z )⋆. The amount of metal mass in the planet that can be attributed to accretion of metal-enriched disk gas ( MZ, excess ) provides a lower limit on the total mass of volatiles that evaporated off drifting pebbles: 

Mpeb −evap = MZ, excess 

P 

> V

fV,[mol] (ZV /Z )⋆

(29) where Mpeb −evap gives the minimum mass of peb-bles that must have passed through the planet’s loca-tion and enriched the gas in the volatile. The metal mass MZ, excess = Zp, excess × Mp, where Zp, excess =

Zp(¯ xexcess /¯x) is the mass fraction of metals accreted through metal-enriched gas (Equation 20), ¯ xexcess is the mass fraction averaged enrichment due to excess volatile accretion (Equation 19, equivalent to gV,excess (ZV /Z )⋆

with sV,excess = 0), and Mp is the planet mass. This provides an independent and typically a more conserva-tive limit on the solid mass required compared to the existing minimum mass nebula estimates. This is be-cause previous estimates of the minimum mass nebula use only the metal mass observed in the planetary sys-tem whereas in our formalism, the observed excess metal mass is a < 1 fraction of the minimum mass nebula es-timate. For example, if a planet accretes CO-enriched disk gas, the CO that evaporated off drifting pebbles constituted only a fraction of their mass, and the re-maining mass must still have been present even if it was not accreted onto the planet. For the three inner HR 8799 planets, Xuan et al. (2026) estimate that the cumulative mass of excess CO accreted from enriched disk gas is 128 +35  

> −33

M⊕. Assum-ing that 40% of C is in CO (and 40 ×(C /O) ⋆ ≈ 22% of O is in CO), fC,[CO] = 0 .4 and fO,[CO] = 0 .22, and the de-nominator of Equation 29 is = 0 .4×0.184+0 .22 ×0.416 ≈

0.17, where ( ZV /Z )⋆ for C and O are taken from Table 1 based on Asplund et al. (2021). That is, almost 17% of the mass of a pebble is lost when it crosses the CO snowline and loses CO ice to vapor. This translates to a 

Mpeb −evap = 750 ±200 M⊕, which is significantly greater than the estimated metal mass ( ∼ 410 ± 45 M⊕, see discussion above) of all four planets. A lower assumed fraction fC,[CO] of C in CO would slightly decrease the numerator (because more of the observed metal mass can then be accounted for in the static disk picture) but this is more than compensated for by the decrease in the denominator, in effect increasing Mpeb −evap . Simi-larly, the outermost planet is estimated to have accreted 21 +18  

> −10

M⊕ of excess N via N 2 enriched gas. Assuming that 60% of N is contained in N 2, fN,[N 2] = 0 .6, and we find that pebbles lose 3.2% of their mass at the N 2 snow-line. This translates to a Mpeb −evap = 670 +570  

> −320

M⊕, a much looser constraint due to the less precise N abun-dance measurement.  

> 5.

CONCLUSIONS In this work, we established novel and simple relation-ships between atmospheric metallicity and metal mass fraction that are easily generalizable to stars of different compositions and varying enrichment of different ele-ments. We then showed how the enrichment of volatile and refractory elements are related by the proportions in which a planet accretes metals from solids and gas. By relating these enrichments to the metal mass fractions, we calculate the amount of metals accreted via different sources. Estimates of the absolute amounts of metals accreted via solids and gas provide an exciting window into the assembly of planets and the properties of the disks in which they form. We discuss the application of this framework to observations of two systems, HR 8799 (Xuan et al. 2026) and AF Lep (Xuan et al. 2026), to demonstrate how it can utilize atmospheric composi-tion measurements to make inferences about how giant planets are assembled. The estimated amount of solid accretion gives us an empirical constraint on the efficiency with which solids are accreted during the runaway phase of gas giant for-mation. It is difficult to quantify the efficiency of solid accretion during this phase theoretically and the empir-ical constraints we obtain can inform future theoretical work in this area. The amount of metals accreted via gas inform us about the metal-enrichment of the disk gas, which can reveal whether or not disk evolutionary 12 processes played an important part in setting the gas metallicity. If the required disk gas metallicity goes be-yond expectations from a static disk due to, e.g., pebble drift and evaporation, then we can use the estimated ex-cess metal mass to derive a novel estimate for the min-imum disk mass for a planet’s formation. The inferred enrichment of disk gas also provides constraints for the-oretical disk models that are orthogonal to equivalent measurements in protoplanetary disks. This quantitative framework can be utilized to lever-age giant planet atmospheric compositions into calculat-ing the amount of metals accreted via different sources during the planet’s formation, in particular envelope ac-cretion. It is best suited to planets for which both refrac-tory and volatiles species abundances can be measured as that allows us to separate the metals accreted via solids and gas. Constraints on oxygen and carbon, which are commonly obtained, are extremely useful because these elements constitute nearly 60% of the total metal mass in Sun-like stars and their protoplanetary disks. For distant giant planets at a few to tens of au that are often hot but not hot enough to have refractories such as Fe and Si entirely in the gas phase, moderately re-fractory species such as sulfur offer a promising probe of solid accretion. For some directly imaged planets, FeH and SiO could be potential tracers. For transiting plan-ets, sulfur may or may not be a tracer of solid accretion, depending on where these planets formed. More refrac-tory species such as Fe, Si, Mg and potentially Na and K would provide better constraints for solid accretion. This framework is especially powerful in multi-planetary systems and it provides remarkable con-straints on the accretion history and natal disk of the HR 8799 system (Xuan et al. 2026). Given that most observed giant planets are sans companion, it would be valuable to use this framework to understand the sources of metals during runaway accretion as well as to quan-tify the astrophysical scatter in the metal mass accreted via different sources across the broader population of giant planets. This exercise and a comparison of the atmospheric metallicities with the bulk metallicities of giant planets (inferred via their masses, radii, and ages) would provide a much more detailed picture of how giant planets are assembled. It would also enable us to deci-pher why runaway accretion is delayed beyond classical expectations and why super-Jupiter bulk metallicities flatten at super-stellar values (Chachan et al. 2025a). REFERENCES  

> Altwegg, K., Balsiger, H., & Fuselier, S. A. 2019, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 57, 113, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-091918-104409 Armitage, T., Williams, J., Zhang, K., et al. 2026, The Astrophysical Journal, 998, 308, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae353d Asplund, M., Amarsi, A. M., & Grevesse, N. 2021, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 653, A141, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202140445 Baburaj, A., Ruffio, J.-B., Perrin, M., et al. 2026, The Astronomical Journal, 172, 28, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae6919 Banzatti, A., Pontoppidan, K. M., Carr, J. S., et al. 2023, ApJL, 957, L22, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf5ec Birnstiel, T., Klahr, H., & Ercolano, B. 2012, Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics, 539, A148, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118136 Bitsch, B., Morbidelli, A., Johansen, A., et al. 2018, eprint arXiv:1801.02341. https://arxiv.org/abs/1801.02341 Booth, R. A., Clarke, C. J., Madhusudhan, N., & Ilee, J. D. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 3994, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1103 Bosman, A. D., Alarc´ on, F., Bergin, E. A., et al. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 257, 7, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac1435 Brouwers, M. G., Vazan, A., & Ormel, C. W. 2018, A&A, 611, A65, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731824 Chachan, Y., Fortney, J. J., Ohno, K., Thorngren, D., & Murray-Clay, R. 2025a, The Astrophysical Journal, 994, 43, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae0cbf Chachan, Y., Knutson, H. A., Lothringer, J., & Blake, G. A. 2023, ApJ, 943, 112, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca614 Chachan, Y., & Lee, E. J. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 952, L20, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ace257 Chachan, Y., Lothringer, J., Inglis, J., et al. 2025b, The Astronomical Journal, 170, 234, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adfbeb Chametla, R. O., & Masset, F. S. 2021, MNRAS, 501, 24, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3681 Cherubim, C., Wordsworth, R., Hu, R., & Shkolnik, E. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 967, 139, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3e77 Chiang, E., & Youdin, A. 2010, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 38, 493, doi: 10.1146/annurev-earth-040809-152513 Cimerman, N. P., Kuiper, R., & Ormel, C. W. 2017, MNRAS, 471, 4662, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1924 Dartois, E., Engrand, C., Duprat, J., et al. 2018, A&A, 609, A65, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731322

13 

Fortney, J. J., Mordasini, C., Nettelmann, N., et al. 2013, ApJ, 775, 80, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/775/1/80 Fuentes, J. R., & Cumming, A. 2020, Physical Review Fluids, 5, 124501, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.5.124501 Gail, H.-P., & Trieloff, M. 2017, A&A, 606, A16, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201730480 Guillot, T., Santos, N. C., Pont, F., et al. 2006, A&A, 453, L21, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20065476 Guillot, T., Stevenson, D. J., Hubbard, W. B., & Saumon, D. 2004, in Jupiter. The Planet, Satellites and Magnetosphere, ed. F. Bagenal, T. E. Dowling, & W. B. McKinnon (Cambridge University Press), 35–57 Helled, R., & Stevenson, D. 2017, ApJ, 840, L4, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa6d08 Helled, R., Bodenheimer, P., Podolak, M., et al. 2014, Protostars and Planets VI, 643, doi: 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816531240-ch028 Helled, R., Stevenson, D. J., Lunine, J. I., et al. 2022, Icarus, Volume 378, article id. 114937., 378, 114937, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2022.114937 Hu, R., Seager, S., & Yung, Y. L. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 807, 8, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/807/1/8 Huang, P., Yu, F., Lee, E. J., Dong, R., & Bai, X.-N. 2025, ApJ, 988, 94, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/addd1f Ida, S., Guillot, T., & Morbidelli, A. 2016, A&A, 591, A72, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201628099 Ikoma, M., & Kobayashi, H. 2025, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Volume 63, Issue 1, pp. 217-258, 38 pp., 63, 217, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-052722-094843 Kama, M., Shorttle, O., Jermyn, A. S., et al. 2019, Astrophys. J., 885, 114, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab45f8 Kanumalla, K., Line, M. R., Chiarella, M., et al. 2026, The Astronomical Journal, 172, 83, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae77f1 Kempton, E. M.-R., & Knutson, H. A. 2024, Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 90, 411, doi: 10.2138/rmg.2024.90.12 Lin, D. N. C., & Papaloizou, J. 1986, ApJ, 309, 846, doi: 10.1086/164653 Lissauer, J. J. 1993, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 31, 129, doi: 10.1146/annurev.aa.31.090193.001021 Lissauer, J. J., Hubickyj, O., D’Angelo, G., & Bodenheimer, P. 2009, Icarus, 199, 338, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2008.10.004 Lodders, K., Bergemann, M., & Palme, H. 2025, Space Science Reviews, 221, 23, doi: 10.1007/s11214-025-01146-w Lothringer, J. D., Lowson, N., & Fu, G. 2026, The Astronomical Journal, Volume 171, Issue 1, id.31, 20 pp., 171, 31, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae1b8e Lothringer, J. D., Rustamkulov, Z., Sing, D. K., et al. 2021, ApJ, 914, 12, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abf8a9 Lothringer, J. D., Bennett, K. A., Sing, D. K., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 274, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adc117 Madhusudhan, N. 2019, ARAA, 57, 617, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081817-051846 Mishra, A., & Li, A. 2015, ApJ, 809, 120, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/809/2/120 ¨Oberg, K. I., & Bergin, E. A. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 831, doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/831/2/L19 ¨Oberg, K. I., Murray-Clay, R., & Bergin, E. A. 2011, ApJL, 743, L16, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/743/1/L16 Ohno, K., Ikoma, M., Okuzumi, S., & Kimura, T. 2026, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, 78, 493, doi: 10.1093/pasj/psaf157 Ormel, C. W., Shi, J.-M., & Kuiper, R. 2015, MNRAS, 447, 3512, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2704 Parker, L. T., Birkby, J. L., Gandhi, S., et al. 2026, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag1050 Pascucci, I., Skinner, B. N., Deng, D., et al. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal, 953, 183, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ace4bf Pelletier, S., Benneke, B., Chachan, Y., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 10, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad8b28 Pollack, J. B., Hubickyj, O., Bodenheimer, P. H., et al. 1996, Icarus, 124, 62, doi: 10.1006/icar.1996.0190 Romero-Mirza, C. E., Banzatti, A., ¨Oberg, K. I., et al. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 975, 78, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad769e Rosenthal, M. M., Chiang, E. I., Ginzburg, S., & Murray-Clay, R. A. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 2054, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1721 Rosenthal, M. M., & Murray-Clay, R. A. 2020, ApJ, 898, 108, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab9eb2 Rosenthal, M. M., Murray-Clay, R. A., Perets, H. B., & Wolansky, N. 2018, ApJ, 861, 74, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aac4a1 Ruffio, J.-B., Xuan, J. W., Chachan, Y., et al. 2026, Nature Astronomy, 10, 511, doi: 10.1038/s41550-026-02783-z Schneider, A. D., & Bitsch, B. 2021, A&A, 654, A72, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202141096 Smith, P. C. B., Sanchez, J. A., Line, M. R., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 293, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad8574 Stammler, S. M., Lichtenberg, T., Dra˙ zkowska, J., & Birnstiel, T. 2023, A&A, 670, L5, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245512 14 

Thorngren, D., & Fortney, J. J. 2019, ApJL, 874, L31, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab1137 Thorngren, D. P., Fortney, J. J., Murray-Clay, R. A., & Lopez, E. D. 2016, ApJ, 831, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/831/1/64 Turrini, D., Schisano, E., Fonte, S., et al. 2021, ApJ, 909, 40, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd6e5 Vazan, A., Helled, R., & Guillot, T. 2018, A&A, 610, L14, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201732522 Williams, J., & Krijt, S. 2025, MNRAS, 537, 831, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf075 Xuan, J. W., Ruffio, J.-B., Chachan, Y., et al. 2026, The Astrophysical Journal, 1000, 27, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae448f Xuan, J. W., Balmer, W. O., Chachan, Y., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2608.10068. https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.10068 Zhang, K., Booth, A. S., Law, C. J., et al. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 257, 5, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ac1580 Zhu, Z., Nelson, R. P., Dong, R., Espaillat, C., & Hartmann, L. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 755, 6, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/755/1/6