Title: Constraining the lives and times of exoplanets through evolutionary Bayesian retrievals

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.25845v1

Published Time: Wed, 29 Jul 2026 01:09:17 GMT

Number of Pages: 34

Markdown Content:
> Draft version July 29, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

Constraining the lives and times of exoplanets through evolutionary Bayesian retrievals 

Harrison Nicholls ,1 Tim Lichtenberg ,2 Ben Riegler ,3 Robb Calder ,1 and Vincent Fortuin 3, 4 

> 1Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, United Kingdom
> 2Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of Groningen, The Netherlands
> 3Helmholtz AI, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
> 4University of Technology Nuremberg, Germany

ABSTRACT Static retrieval frameworks are leading tools for interpreting exoplanet observations, yet time-independent modelling leaves them prone to degeneracy and unable to resolve exoplanets’ histories. The compositions and structures of surveyed super-Earth and sub-Neptune sub-populations remain unclear, but are shaped by physics acting across Gyr timescales. Interpreting these planets as static non-evolving snapshots allows multiple degenerate scenarios to explain their observed properties. We develop a generalised parameter retrieval framework, built on asynchronous Bayesian optimisation to efficiently dispatch a multi-physics forward-model, resolving exoplanets’ evolving properties from their initial magma ocean conditions to the present day. By building Bayesian retrievals into the PROTEUS framework, sensitive coupled interior-atmosphere interactions are naturally resolved and interpretations are constrained to physically permissible scenarios. We test evolutionary retrievals with three exoplanet prototypes: a young sub-Neptune, an older super-Earth, and a warm terrestrial planet — representative of the surveyed exoplanet population. Evolutionary retrieval jointly infers their mantle redox conditions, metallic core fractions, and early volatile inventories from spectroscopically accessible observables. Some scenarios remain subject to well-established degeneracies between core fractions and volatile budgets. Terrestrial-mass exoplanets benefit from strong observable-parameter correlations that lift these degeneracies; we recover post-formation volatile inventories with ≲ 20 per-cent error. Exoplanet science is primed for incoming JWST, PLATO, Roman, and ELT data — observations which necessitate careful interpretation. Adoption of time-evolved models lifts interpre-tive degeneracies, providing the means to understand the deep interiors and lifetime histories of worlds throughout our galaxy. 

Keywords: Exoplanets (498) — Exoplanet evolution (491) — Bayesian statistics (1900) — Astronom-ical methods (1043) 

1. INTRODUCTION Exoplanet observations measure present-day atmo-spheric compositions and bulk properties, such as masses and radii. Insight into specific planet’s ear-lier conditions must be drawn by pairing fingerprints of physical processes imprinted onto their current condi-tions (e.g., C/O ratios; J. C. Bond et al. (2010); N. Mad-husudhan (2012)) against a conceptual understanding of planetary formation and evolution processes (E. A. Bergin et al. 2026; S. Krijt et al. 2023). In parallel, we can attempt to explain the observed trends in the wider exoplanet population, such as the ‘radius valley’ divid-

> Email: harrison.nicholls@ast.cam.ac.uk

ing super-Earths from sub-Neptunes (B. J. Fulton et al. 2017; C. S. K. Ho & V. Van Eylen 2023), by considera-tion of the driving physical processes. Computer models necessarily provide the connection between observations and planets’ past and internal conditions (J. K. Barstow & K. Heng 2020; N. Madhusudhan 2019). A common approach for inferring the conditions within exoplanet interiors, from observations, is to per-form a parameter retrieval (N. Madhusudhan & S. Sea-ger 2009). Parameter retrievals generally use statisti-cal methods to carefully sample a pre-defined parameter space; attempting to converge upon a set of parameters which best fit some observations. A forward model is used to map parameters to observables. The outcome from evaluating each forward model — i.e., each ‘best arXiv:2607.25845v1 [astro-ph.EP] 28 Jul 2026 2guess’ on a planet’s true state — is a necessary quantity for targeting subsequent iterations of a retrieval process. The efficiency of statistical retrieval frameworks has enabled exploration of diverse physical regimes and in-ference of small exoplanets’ internal structures (C. Pi-aulet et al. 2023; B. Benneke et al. 2024; D. Valen-cia et al. 2025). However, existing frameworks require computationally fast forward models: a weakness miti-gated by the adoption of simplified physics and substan-tial modelling assumptions (D. Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013). For example, ‘free chemistry’ retrievals permit parametrised atmospheric chemical abundances to be derived from an observation, without specific consider-ations of chemical favourability (C. Fisher & K. Heng 2022; J. K. Barstow & K. Heng 2020; S.-M. Tsai et al. 2021). Forward models invoked within retrieval frame-works have largely simulated exoplanets’ present day structures and compositions (R. J. MacDonald & N. E. Batalha 2023). They do not consider planets’ lifetime histories, relevant physical hysteresis effects (M. Turbet et al. 2021; M. J. Way et al. 2016; I. D. Boer et al. 2025), nor whether the modelled conditions are phys-ically achievable (H. Nicholls et al. 2026c; R. J. Mac-Donald et al. 2020). For example, it remains unclear whether massive H 2O envelopes are permissible forma-tion outcomes (T. Kimura & T. Lichtenberg 2026). Deep insight from current methods is inhibited by multiple de-generate static-structure solutions being readily able to explain the observed states of individual planets (J. K. Barstow & K. Heng 2020). For example, sub-Neptunes’ bulk densities can be equally explained by steam at-mospheres and small metal-core fractions, or extended hydrogen-dominated atmospheres overlying denser inte-riors (J. G. Rogers 2025; J. Venturini et al. 2020; R. Luque & E. Palle 2022; B. Bitsch et al. 2019). Computer simulations of planetary formation and evo-lution provide a physically-justified basis for predicting how planets change throughout their lives (T. Lichten-berg et al. 2026a; W. B. Tonks & H. J. Melosh 1993). We expect that all planets form in hot, molten states, with large inventories of volatiles obtained from their formation and accretion (C. A. Norris & B. J. Wood 2017; Y. Abe & T. Matsui 1986; T. Kimura & M. Ikoma 2020). Young planets cool and lose some frac-tion of their initial volatiles (J. E. Owen 2019), sub-ject to regulation by atmospheric greenhouse effects and buffering by interior-atmosphere volatile exchange (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; K. Hamano et al. 2013; T. Licht-enberg et al. 2021). These planetary evolution models are constructed for predictive applications. For exam-ple, to demarcate magma ocean versus potentially hab-itable regimes (J. Krissansen-Totton et al. 2024; N. F. Wogan et al. 2022; L. Schaefer et al. 2016). Critically, since planetary evolution models are constrained by our knowledge of physics and reasonable assumptions about planets’ initial conditions (L. Elkins-Tanton 2008; L. Schaefer & L. T. Elkins-Tanton 2018), they may natu-rally disfavour inferences of unphysical scenarios. Mod-elled physics and chemistry provide bounds on realistic planetary structures and compositions (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2025; N. Madhusudhan et al. 2016). Evolution models have also been applied interpretively 

through simple grid search approaches, which construct grids of models for post-hoc comparison against obser-vations (H. Nicholls et al. 2026b; J. Krissansen-Totton 2023; L. Schaefer et al. 2016). Grid searches are inef-ficient approaches for parameter inference, because the grid size scales geometrically with the number of pa-rameters. Exploratory applications of Bayesian machine learning techniques to parameter inference have demon-strated a factor-of-eight performance improvement over classical retrieval algorithms (L. Pagliaro et al. 2026; E. O. Garvin et al. 2024; J. J. C. Hayes et al. 2020; M. Yakubu & V. O. Jude 2026). Previously, J. E. Owen & Timothy. D. Morton (2016) applied the MESA planetary evolution model within a Bayesian inference framework to estimate the initial atmosphere masses for exoplan-ets Kepler-36 b and c (B. Paxton et al. 2011), suggest-ing that generalised incorporation of planetary evolution models into retrieval frameworks may be feasible. Here, we test the efficacy of incorporating physically-comprehensive planetary evolution simulations into a generalised parameter retrieval framework, for infer-ring exoplanets’ historical and interior conditions. The PROTEUS planetary evolution simulation framework is adopted and expanded with a new mode of opera-tion. Previously, PROTEUS could run simulations of planetary evolution either standalone or across regu-larly sampled parameter-grid axes. Here, we implement a new run mode in PROTEUS to efficiently dispatch simulations (forward models) for parameter retrieval, through asynchronous Bayesian optimisation. We test parameter retrieval with three synthetic exoplanet pro-totypes, as a potential successor to the contemporary non-evolving static retrieval paradigm: a young sub-Neptune, an older super-Earth, and a warm terrestrial planet. This paper is structured as follows: 

• Section 2 describes our framework for simulat-ing planetary evolution, PROTEUS, and develops our asynchronous Bayesian optimisation (ABO) retrieval method. We also describe the static-structure model used for comparison. 3

• Section 3.1 establishes three ground-truth scenar-ios, to generate synthetic observables from cho-sen parameters. We test retrieving these parame-ters with ABO (Section 3.2) and compare our new approach against static-structure retrievals (Sec-tion 3.3). We also assess which optimisation algo-rithms are better suited for this new application. 

• Section 4.1 discusses the efficacy of evolutionary retrievals to infer the atmospheric, interior, and historical conditions of different exoplanet classes. Section 4.2 considers directions for future devel-opment. Section 4.3 contextualises our findings to specific exoplanets and upcoming telescopic sur-veys. 

• Section 5 draws conclusions and highlights direc-tions for future research.  

> 2.

METHODS 2.1. Planetary evolution modelling 

We use the PROTEUS framework 5 for simulating the time-evolution of planets and their stars. PROTEUS is an established modelling tool for simulating the thermal and compositional evolution of low-mass rocky bodies (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2021). The framework’s modular architecture includes rigor-ous software testing, and enables PROTEUS’ flexible application from sub-Earth to mini-Neptune scenarios (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2026b; M. Barker et al. 2022). PROTEUS self-consistently tracks the time-evolution of a planet’s metallic core, mantle, and atmosphere, alongside the radiation emitted by its host star. The atmosphere regulates planet cooling, while the mantle geodynamics track internal energy production, surface temperature evolution, and magma ocean solidification from the core-mantle-boundary upwards (Y. Abe 1993; L. Elkins-Tanton 2008; D. J. Bower et al. 2019). The mantle begins in an initially molten state — pre-sumed to have arisen from planetary formation and early giant impact events (W. B. Tonks & H. J. Melosh 1993; P. H. Warren 1985; M. M. Hirschmann 2012). Energy and mass are redistributed between the atmospheric and interior domains; the interior domain includes a silicate mantle and metallic core. At each time-step, after evolv-ing the mantle geodynamics by sub-stepping through some time interval ∆ t, the upper energy-flux boundary condition on the mantle is updated to achieve a self-consistent solution with the simulated atmospheric cli- 

> 5https://proteus-framework.org/

mate state (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2021; T. Lebrun et al. 2013). PROTEUS adopts an iterative approach with adap-tive time-stepping. Simulations begin with an initial time-step ∆ t of 200 years. ∆t is then adapted de-pending on the rates at which the mantle melt frac-tion Φ m and the outgoing energy flux Fatm change. The time-step is capped by absolute and relative lim-its: ∆ t ≤ 5 Myr + 610 t. The wall-clock runtime of each PROTEUS simulation is variable, but generally corre-lates with the physical integration time of the simula-tion, since the modelled physics imposes a ceiling on the simulation time-step size ∆ t.In this work, PROTEUS simulations terminate un-der four independently sufficient criteria: (a) when the requested integration time tevo has been attained, or (b) when the atmosphere surface pressure is reduced to 

< 1 bar through escape processes, or (c) when the man-tle melt fraction Φ m is less than 5 wt% (H. Nicholls et al. 2024), or (d) when the simulation wall-clock runtime ex-ceeds 600 seconds (Appendix E). The relevant input and output variables to these PROTEUS calculations are de-scribed in Section 2.3. Atmospheric compositions are re-calculated at each iteration by PROTEUS’ outgassing module, CALLIOPE 6, using an equilibrium thermochemical-solubility scheme (P. A. Sossi et al. 2020; D. J. Bower et al. 2022). CALLIOPE solves for partial pressures of the major volatile species 7 subject to H-C-N-S mass con-servation between the planet’s atmosphere and mantle (P. A. Sossi et al. 2023; H. Nicholls et al. 2024). These volatile species are partitioned between the molten man-tle reservoir and outgassed atmosphere subject to the empirically derived solubility laws, which depend on the temperature and mantle redox conditions (P. A. Sossi et al. 2023; J. Boulliung & B. J. Wood 2022; J. E. Dixon 1997; L. S. Armstrong et al. 2015; P. Ardia et al. 2013; R. Dasgupta et al. 2022; F. Gaillard et al. 2022). These volatiles’ dissolved components are assumed to be controlled by magma saturation at the surface, so they become progressively degassed as the planet cools and the available reservoir of molten mantle material decreases (H. Nicholls et al. 2026a; L. Schaefer & B. Fegley 2017; N. Katyal et al. 2020; A. Walbecq et al. 2025). Simultaneously, we solve for volatile species’ partial pressures at thermochemical equilibrium us-ing temperature-dependent reaction coefficients derived from JANAF (M. W. Chase 1986).   

> 6https://proteus-framework.org/CALLIOPE/
> 7CO 2, CO, H 2O, N 2, SO 2, S 2, H 2S, H 2, NH 3, O 2

4The chemical redox conditions of the upper-mantle factor into our volatile partitioning and chemistry cal-culations. Mantle redox is largely determined by the relative proportion of Fe 2+ /Fe 3+ , which is modulated by multiple competing physical, dynamical, and chem-ical processes (T. Lichtenberg 2021; F. Gaillard et al. 2022; L. Schaefer et al. 2024; B. R. Frost 1991). We represent the mantle redox state with an oxygen fugac-ity f O2, which is analogous to the partial pressure of O2 under ideal conditions (D. J. Bower et al. 2025). Since f O2 primarily serves as a proxy for the oxidation state of Fe, we calculate it relative to the equivalent 

f OIW 2 of the iron-w¨ ustite reaction (R. A. Fischer et al. 2011), which depends on the surface temperature Tsurf 

throughout the simulated evolution. The relative offset between the calculated mantle redox state and the iron-w¨ ustite buffer parametrisation is an input parameter to PROTEUS simulations: ∆IW = log 10 [f O2/f OIW 2 ] (M. Sastre et al. 2026). The total mass inventories of volatile elements (C-H-O-N-S) in the planet’s atmosphere-mantle sys-tem decrease during the simulated evolution due to parametrised atmospheric escape processes (E. Pos-tolec et al. 2026). Hydrodynamic energy-limited escape (D. M. Hunten et al. 1987; J. E. Owen 2019) is included as non-fractionating atmospheric mass loss process (H. Nicholls et al. 2026b; E. Postolec et al. 2026), subject to an evolving stellar X-ray and ultraviolet spectrum through the MORS module 8 (C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021; P. R. Behr et al. 2023; F. Spada et al. 2013). Or-bital parameters are held constant during each simula-tion. The vertical atmosphere climate calculations are per-formed with AGNI 9: a radiative-convective atmosphere model applicable to diverse planetary regimes (H. Nicholls et al. 2025b,c). The plane-parallel atmosphere is compositionally homogeneous with gas-phase mixing ratios set by degassing at the magma ocean surface (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2021; L. Elkins-Tanton 2008). At each PROTEUS time-step, AGNI uses convective and radia-tive energy fluxes to calculate an energy-conserving so-lution for the 1D climate state (H. Nicholls et al. 2026c). Atmospheric dry convection is modelled using a mixing-length formalism (M. Joyce & J. Tayar 2023; L. Prandtl 1925; M. Marley & T. Robinson 2015). Radiative fluxes are calculated using the SOCRATES radiative trans-fer suite, which implements a two-stream method with Rayleigh scattering (W. Zdunkowski et al. 1980; J. M.   

> 8https://proteus-framework.org/MORS/
> 9https://www.h-nicholls.space/AGNI/

Edwards & A. Slingo 1996; J. Manners 2024). Gas opac-ities are represented and combined using correlated-k

equivalent extinction with 16 longwave and shortwave spectral bands (A. A. Lacis & V. Oinas 1991; D. S. Amundsen et al. 2017). Assuming that all modelled planet scenarios are tidally locked, we adopt a stellar zenith angle of 54 .74 ◦ and geometric scale factor of 1⁄4

(K. Hamano et al. 2013; T. Lebrun et al. 2013; T. W. Cronin 2014). The total upward-directed energy flux 

Fatm calculated by AGNI determines the simulated plan-ets’ rate of cooling, and thus, whether they solidify or maintain permanent magma oceans (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2021). In previous studies, PROTEUS adopted the SPI-DER 10 mantle dynamics model to simulate the com-bined physics of magma ocean energy transport, cool-ing, and mantle crystallisation (D. J. Bower et al. 2018). SPIDER uses 1D mixing-length theory to estimate man-tle convective heat fluxes, enabling a 1D representation of the mantle thermo-compositional structure (Y. Abe 1993; Y. Abe & T. Matsui 1986; J. Monteux et al. 2016). However, SPIDER is numerically unstable in the sub-Neptune regime because their internal conditions ex-ceed the calibration domain of our empirical thermo-dynamic tables (A. S. Wolf & D. J. Bower 2018; K. M. Boley et al. 2023). We appeal to boundary-layer the-ory to parametrise mantle dynamics and solidification, which remains a common approach in the literature for its simplicity and numerical stability (L. Schaefer et al. 2016; H. Nicholls et al. 2026a; J. Krissansen-Totton & J. J. Fortney 2022; T. Lebrun et al. 2013; K. Hamano et al. 2013). This choice enables testing of evolution-ary exoplanet-lifetime retrievals for prototypical sub-Neptune exoplanets. In brief, we assume solidification of the magma ocean from the core-mantle boundary upwards (M. Maurice et al. 2017; V. S. Solomatov & D. J. Stevenson 1993), in which the volumetric mantle melt fraction evolves subject to its potential tempera-ture Tpot , initialised at 3200 K to ensure a fully-molten initial state. The mantle is homogeneously heated by radioactive decay and latent heat released by crystalli-sation of its MgSiO 3 material (L. Elkins-Tanton 2008). Interior structure includes a metallic core, whose radius fraction rc = Rcore /R int is a simulation input parame-ter. Core density and mantle radius Rint are calculated at t = 0 from the total planet mass and its material properties (L. Noack & M. Lasbleis 2020; H. Nicholls et al. 2026c). Appendix A details our interior structure  

> 10 https://proteus-framework.org/SPIDER/

5calculation and mantle dynamics model (R. Calder et al. In prep.), based upon L. Schaefer et al. (2016). 2.2. Evolutionary retrievals within the PROTEUS framework 

2.2.1. Asynchronous Bayesian optimisation 

We estimate planets’ interior and past properties, based on some observables, as a parameter retrieval problem. Retrieval methods aim to minimise the dif-ference between the simulated values and ‘true’ values of some set of ‘observable’ quantities. These methods estimate the best-fitting values on the non-observable input parameters which correspond to the best-fitting combination of simulated observables. The set of param-eters which generate the best-fitting simulated observ-ables provide insight into planets’ internal structures, bulk and atmospheric compositions, and the multiple physical processes which we cannot directly observe (N. Madhusudhan & S. Seager 2009; J. K. Barstow & K. Heng 2020). The PROTEUS framework includes a modular for-ward model to simulate planetary evolution, and modes for dispatching the model. Several components of the modelled system cannot be expressed analytically. For example, gas opacities are derived from complex quan-tum mechanical calculations that generate pre-tabulated line-lists. Our radiative transfer calculations there-fore rely on pre-computed tables of opacity coefficients, accessed via the FORTRAN-based SOCRATES code (J. M. Edwards & A. Slingo 1996), which are non-linear functions of temperature, pressure, and composition (S. L. Grimm et al. 2021; J. Tennyson & S. Yurchenko 2018). The gradient of the objective function f (x) is not accessible because the simulated physical system is not modelled through a wholly analytical formulation. Auto-differentiation approaches can be considered for obtaining gradients of f (x) in other applications, but this requires special consideration from the initial stages of model construction and coding (W. H. Press 2007; J. Bezanson et al. 2017). Numerical methods to approxi-mate function gradients are computationally expensive, so a gradient-free optimisation approach to parameter retrieval is necessary. We strive to perform only point-wise evaluations to obtain a best-fitting set of some pa-rameters. Batched or parallel Bayesian optimisation (BO) of-fers a principled framework to efficiently explore high-dimensional parameter spaces without requiring func-tion gradients (D. Ginsbourger et al. 2010; J. Moˇ ckus 2005; N. Madhusudhan & S. Seager 2009; D. Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013). Bayesian optimisation provides an iterative gradient-free framework designed for expensive ‘black-box’ objective functions (D. R. Jones et al. 1998; R. Garnett 2023; A. B. Savel et al. 2025). In order to op-timise the difference between simulated values and mea-surements made by observations with only point-wise evaluations, BO tracks the uncertainty on an objective function via a probabilistic surrogate model; in our case, a Gaussian process (GP) (C. E. Rasmussen & C. K. I. Williams 2005). This surrogate informs an acquisition function, proposing the next query location in the pa-rameter space (J. Wilson et al. 2018; S. Aigrain & D. Foreman-Mackey 2023). Here, we incorporate asynchronous Bayesian optimi-sation (ABO) into the PROTEUS framework to effi-ciently dispatch the simulations required for fitting some observables. The input parameters to PROTEUS are categorised as fixed θ ∈ Θ and inferred x ∈ X ⊂ Rd.It is x which we will optimise for (retrieve) while θ

are kept fixed throughout each retrieval. The forward model PROTEUS outputs of interest are collected in Γ ⊂ Rm, allowing us to construct the deterministic map-ping Mθ : X 7 → Γ. The function Mθ represents a single forward evaluation of PROTEUS, to yield Γ. Given ob-servables γo ∈ Γ, the goal of the optimisation is then to infer the values of parameters x∗ ∈ X which satisfy the condition γo = Mθ (x∗). The outputs from PROTEUS simulations are used to evaluate a scalar objective function which quantifies deviation between simulated and ‘true’ values of some observable quantities. The objective function encoding this optimality condition is a dimension-wise scaled Eu-clidean distance between the true values of the observ-ables, γo, and the values calculated by PROTEUS, 

f (x) = − log 10 

"

1m − Mθ (x)

γo + ε

> 2

+ ε

#

, (1) where the fraction denominator is an element-wise nor-malisation factor, which acts as a regulariser for ob-servables that will vary across different scales. We de-fine 1m = (1 , 1, ..., 1) T ∈ Rm, such that larger values of f represent better fits to the true observables. Alog-transform is applied to the objective function f for Gaussianity, which provides numerical stability within the optimisation scheme (C. E. Rasmussen & C. K. I. Williams 2005). A small tolerance term ε = 10 −10 en-sures the log-transform domain is well-defined, so larger 

f represent better fitting scenarios, and f = +10 is a perfect fit. We also apply a log-transform to strictly positive-valued quantities that naturally scale logarith-mically, rather than linearly; e.g, atmospheric mixing ratios and surface pressures. Some of our results are presented with objective func-tion values normalised to some best-fitting case, f ′ =6100 f /f best , such that f ′ = 100 represents the corre-sponding best-fitting solution. Note that f ′ remains a logarithmically-scaled quantity, so f ′ = 100 represents a more than twice-better fitting parameter combination than f ′ = 50. Each evaluation of our objective requires a PROTEUS forward simulation, which is computationally expensive (Appendix E). The wall-clock duration of each ABO step is the sum of: (a) the initialisation time for the PROTEUS simulation, which involves loading Python and thermodynamic data; (b) the simulation’s integra-tion time, which scales with the numerical expense of the modelled physics; and (c) evaluation of f in Equation 1 and determination of the next best x. Importantly, since PROTEUS simulation wall-clock times are variable, dis-patching batches of simulations synchronously would re-sult in idle compute resources (Figure 1, B. Riegler et al. (2026)). Instead, our asynchronous batch BO routine allows us to maximally leverage high performance com-puting resources and permits PROTEUS simulations to run fully in parallel, while informing the same retrieval problem. This BO approach reduces the wall-clock time required for a complete parameter retrieval by minimis-ing computer idle-time (G. De Ath et al. 2021). Pointwise evaluations of f give a finite data set Dn =(X, y ), of inputs X = (xi)ni=1 ∈ Rn×d and outputs 

y = ( yi)ni=1 ∈ Rn. To reason about the uncertainty in f stemming from the finiteness of our data set, we place a zero-mean Gaussian process prior on the objec-tive function. That is, we assume 

f ∼ GP (0 , k ℓ(·, ·)) , (2) under a positive-definite covariance function kℓ : X 2 7 →

R>0, with hyperparameters ℓ. Coupled with a Gaussian likelihood for the outputs, 

p(y | f, X ) = N (y; f (X), σ 2 

> y

In), (3) with observation noise σy , this gives the function space Gaussian process posterior 

f | Dn ∼ GP (μn(·), σ 2

> n

(·)) . (4) For some input, x ∈ X , the posterior mean and variance functions are given by 

μn(x) = kℓ(x, X )( Kn + σ2 

> y

In)−1y (5) 

σ2

> n

(x) = kℓ(x, x ) − kℓ(x, X )( Kn + σ2 

> y

In)−1kℓ(X, x ),

(6) with Kn ∈ Rn×n (C. E. Rasmussen & C. K. I. Williams 2005), the kernel matrix given by (Kn)ij = kℓ(xi, x j ) ∀ i, j ∈ [n]. (7)    

> Synchronous
> Asynchronous
> w1
> w2
> w3
> w1
> w2
> w3
> Time
> busy idle query
> Figure 1. Illustration of algorithmic dispatch of a forward– model under synchronous ( top ) and asynchronous ( bottom )Bayesian optimisation approaches, for three worker CPUs. The asynchronous framework allows for more queries across the same wall-clock duration, by avoiding idle time. Illustra-tion adapted from B. Riegler et al. (2026).

The model in eq. (4) and the query decision (the ‘acqui-sition function’) give an iterative procedure for exploring the search space, X , one point-wise evaluation of f at a time. The ABO algorithm is formally described in Appendix B. Iterative Bayesian optimisation requires an initial guess to bootstrap the algorithm. Each of our asyn-chronous BO retrievals are initialised with three PRO-TEUS simulations (i.e., three evaluations of f ) with pa-rameters x selected by random uniform sampling within specified parameter bounds. Each ABO retrieval’s ran-dom number generator is seeded identically, so repeated retrievals use identical initial guesses, given the same set of parameters x, their priors, and choice of acquisition function and kernel. Our baseline retrieval configuration uses a LogEI ac-quisition function (Section 2.2.2), a Mat´ ern Gaussian process kernel with ν = 3 /2 smoothing (Section 2.2.3), five simultaneous worker processes (each allocated one CPU core), and a maximum of 100 PROTEUS eval-uations after three randomly initialised bootstrapping samples. These choices represent ‘median’ configuration scenarios, from the options currently implemented, and a modest resource allocation appropriate for this proof-of-concept study. We explore the scaling behaviour of our ABO algorithm’s configuration and numerical pa-rameters in Section 3.4. 2.2.2. Acquisition functions 

Using the surrogate model of the objective function in eq. (4), we can make an uncertainty informed trade-off between exploration and exploitation on the search 7space X . In particular, given data, Dn, the next query point (refer to Appendix B), x′ ∈ X , is selected by 

x′ = arg max  

> x∈X

α(x | Dn), (8) where α : X 7 → R is a heuristic for the utility of querying a new input location in the parameter space, termed the ‘acquisition function’. Following B. Riegler et al. (2026), we consider only single-point standard acquisition functions. Three such ‘classical’ standard acquisition functions, which are an-alytical and do not depend on Monte-Carlo sampling of the Gaussian process surrogate model constructed from PROTEUS simulations, are described below. We ex-plore the relative performance of these different acquisi-tion functions in Section 3.4. Firstly, the Upper Confidence Bound (UCB), 

αU CB (x | Dn) = μn(X) + pβσ n(x), (9) with exploration parameter β = 2. UCB favours a suggested x if either the GP predicts a good fit there (exploitation) or the uncertainty is high (exploration). More precisely: the UCB function is a simple heuristic based on optimising a quantile of the credibility interval, for example the 95% outcome, representing the weighted sum of the posterior mean and standard deviation of the joint posterior function (N. Srinivas et al. 2012). The exploration parameter β governs the compromise between exploration of the wider parameter space and exploitation of previously charted regions, informed by the current surrogate model. Secondly, the logarithmic Probability of Improvement (LogPI) acquisition function, 

αP I (x | Dn) = Pf |Dn [f (x) ≥ τ ], (10) with threshold τ . LogPI selects the point x most likely to improve upon τ , without weighting by the magnitude of that improvement (D. R. Jones et al. 1998). Similarly to β in the UCB, the choice of threshold governs the criterion’s exploration-exploitation trade-off. Here, the threshold for selecting a new x is chosen as τ = yi∗ , with 

i∗ = arg max i(yi), representing the best-fitting scenario previously seen during the retrieval. We refer to D. R. Jones et al. (1998) for an in-depth discussion on LogPI threshold selection. Thirdly, we consider the logarithmic Expected Im-provement (LogEI) acquisition function, 

αEI (x | Dn) = Ef |Dn [max( f (x) − yi∗ , 0)] , (11) (D. R. Jones et al. 1998; J. Moˇ ckus 2005). This function develops upon LogPI by additionally considering how much f is improved under a candidate x. Adopting the log-transformed form offers improved numerical stability (S. Ament et al. 2023). 2.2.3. Gaussian process kernels 

Similarly to the choice of acquisition function, the most appropriate choice of Gaussian process kernel for this application is a non-trivial design decision. The Gaussian process is constructed and refined by running PROTEUS simulations during an ABO retrieval, so the kernel must analytically and functionally represent the behaviour of PROTEUS’ modelled physics. We describe four different kernel parameter choices below, and assess their relative scaling performance in Section 3.4. The radial basis function (RBF) is our simplest end-member option for the covariance function adopted as the Gaussian process kernel: 

kℓ(xi, x j ) = exp 

 −d2(xi, x j )2l2



(12) where l is the non-dimensional length scale of the system (Section 2.2.2). The RBF takes the form of a decaying squared exponential function, which is infinitely differ-entiable and therefore presumes that the objective func-tion f is a smooth function of the parameters x. The RBF generates Gaussian processes which may struggle to represent sensitive underlying physics (M. L. Stein 1999). The Mat´ ern kernel generalises the RBF with addi-tional terms, 

kℓ(xi, x j ) = 1Γ( ν)2 ν−1

h √2νl d(xi, x j )

iν

Kν

 √2νl d(xi, x j )



,

(13) where the smoothness parameter ν permits more com-plex behaviour of the objective function (and thus, in our PROTEUS forward model). Γ is the gamma func-tion and Kν is the modified Bessel function of the second kind (C. E. Rasmussen & C. K. I. Williams 2005). The choice of ν is debated in the literature, but it should be informed by the behaviour of the forward model (M. L. Stein 1999). The Mat´ ern kernel resolves to the RBF kernel (Equation 12) in the limit of ν → ∞ , and to a decaying exponential in the case of ν = 1 /2. We explore 

ν = [1 /2, 3/2, 5/2] in Section 3.4, denoted as ‘Mat ν’. For both kernels, the length-scales are chosen by op-timising the density p(l|y), as 

l = arg max  

> l′

log p(y | l′) + log p(l′), (14) with p(y | l) the marginal likelihood and p(l) a prior on length-scales. Following C. Hvarfner et al. (2024) on Bayesian opti-misation in high dimensions, we use 

p(l) = LN (√2 + ln √d, √3) , (15) a Log-normal distribution with dimension-scaled mean and variance. 82.3. Input parameters and output variables 

PROTEUS has input and output variables. We di-vide these variables into four conceptual classes for the purposes of demonstrating the efficacy of evolutionary retrievals. There are two classes of input parameter variables, whose values are not necessarily accessible from tele-scope observations of exoplanets. There remain strong scientific motivations for quantifying these parameters because they trace important physical processes and ex-oplanets’ deep interior conditions (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2025). 2.3.1. Class P1 parameters 

Class P1 variables are input parameters that are held fixed for each of the exoplanet scenarios considered here: current planet age, orbital semi-major axis, and planet mass. Planet ages can be associated with the estimated age of their host-stars (R. Kippenhahn et al. 2012), which are observationally accessible through elemen-tal compositions via nucleocosmochronometry (D. R. Soderblom 2010; W. A. Fowler & F. Hoyle 1960), spin-luminosity evolution (I. Baraffe et al. 2015; B. R. Jørgensen & L. Lindegren 2005), and asteroseismology (A. Jendreieck et al. 2010; C. Aerts 2021; H. Rauer et al. 2025). Masses and orbital solutions are commonly esti-mated from radial velocity and transit-timing measure-ments (S. Seager 2011). In the notation of Section 2.2, these are fixed parameters θ.2.3.2. Class P2 parameters 

Class P2 variables are input parameters that are to be estimated by our retrieval scheme, given the con-straining observables. These quantities are summarised in Table 2 alongside the adopted prior boundaries. These quantities are inaccessible to remote sensing and must be estimated using models (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2025; S. Bloot et al. 2023). The metallic core radius fraction parameter, rc, defines the interior struc-ture. Core-building materials are denser than mantle-building materials, so varying rc from 0 to 1 leads to in-creased planet densities and decreased Robs , for a given total mass Mp (K. Lodders & B. Fegley 1998; L. Noack & M. Lasbleis 2020; S. Bloot et al. 2023). PROTEUS will retrieve rc as a Class P2 parameter. In the notation of Section 2.2, these are input parameters x.Multiple physical processes determine the redox condi-tions within planetary interiors, which regulate the par-titioning and speciation of secondary atmospheres (T. Lichtenberg 2021; D. J. Frost & C. A. McCammon 2008; E. Cottrell et al. 2025). The Solar System planets ex-hibit diverse redox conditions (P. A. Sossi et al. 2025), which are also expected to vary spatially and tempo-rally within the interiors of specific bodies (M. Maurice et al. 2023; M. M. Hirschmann 2021; V. C. Kress & I. S. E. Carmichael 1991). Metallic core segregation is intimately linked to mantle redox conditions, since Fe becomes increasingly incompatible in silicate melts un-der reducing conditions (J. Wade & B. J. Wood 2005; R. G. Trønnes et al. 2019). Following convention, we adopt the surface fugacity of oxygen f O2 as a proxy for mantle redox, quantifying it as the logarithmic oxygen fugacity offset relative to the iron-w¨ ustite buffer reac-tion: ∆IW (B. R. Frost 1991; H. St. C. O’Neill & S. M. Eggins 2002). The oxygen fugacity ∆IW is adopted as a Class P2 parameter to be estimated. Three additional Class P2 parameters define a planet’s initial inventory of volatile elements, endowed following formation and early boil off (S. N. Raymond & A. Mor-bidelli 2022; H. Nicholls et al. 2024; Y. Tang et al. 2024; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2019; S. Krijt et al. 2023). We vary the total initial hydrogen content, quantified as parts-per-million relative to the mantle mass H ppmw . Car-bon and sulfur budgets are defined relative to hydrogen: the bulk C/H mass ratio, and the bulk S/H mass ra-tio. These three quantities scale with total planet mass 

Mp. H. S. Wang et al. (2018) present H ppmw = 109, C/H = 1 .0, and S /H = 2 .2 as concordant estimates on Earth’s early volatile inventory, which each carry substantial uncertainties (A. H. Peslier et al. 2017; G. Dreibus & H. Palme 1996; P. A. Sossi et al. 2025). 2.3.3. Class O1 observables 

There are also two classes of output variables calcu-lated by PROTEUS simulations. Class O1 variables are output quantities used to evaluate the objective function (Equation 1) as the difference between these observed quantities’ ground-truth values and the outputs of each PROTEUS simulation. Careful selection of these con-straining observables is important; they must be accessi-ble to remote sensing methods aimed at real exoplanets, while remaining physically correlated with the estimated Class P2 parameters in order for them to act as effective constraints. We choose seven observable variables to constrain the demonstration retrievals presented in this work. Photospheric radii Robs can be measured using trans-mission spectroscopy and photometry (S. Seager 2011; A. L. Carter et al. 2023). We derive Robs from the hy-drostatic atmosphere solution’s 20 mbar pressure level, appropriate for mid-infrared exoplanet limb measure-ments (E. D. Lopez & J. J. Fortney 2014; J. J. Fortney 2005; H. Nicholls et al. 2026c). The structure of molecu-lar absorption and emission features probe atmospheric 9scale heights, related to the photospheric composition and structure: Hp = RT / (μg ), where R is the ideal gas constant (Y. Ito et al. 2015; H. R. Wakeford & D. K. Sing 2015; J. K. Barstow et al. 2015). We adopt upper-atmosphere temperature, gravitational acceleration, and molecular weight as Class O1 observables (P. Molliere et al. 2022; J. L. Birkby 2018; H. Nicholls et al. 2026c). Furthermore, spectroscopic features attributed to spe-cific molecular species enable estimates on atmospheric metallicity ratios, which we also adopt: C/O, S/O, and O/H (A. C. Childs et al. 2023; N. Madhusudhan 2012; L. Welbanks et al. 2019; A. B. Savel et al. 2026). These seven observables represent a compromise be-tween instrumental limitations and necessary retrieval constraints. In reality, these would be derived jointly from spectroscopy or photometry and have individual uncertainties. The observables would be derived from substantial processing and reduction of raw measure-ment data: steps which would occur before the applica-tion of PROTEUS retrievals to a real exoplanet (K. D. Gordon et al. 2022). Other quantities could also be con-sidered as constraints; e.g., day-night brightness temper-ature contrasts (L. Kreidberg et al. 2019; M. Hammond & R. T. Pierrehumbert 2017). Our ABO retrievals do not consider uncertainties on these observables, since they are derived from synthetic prototype exoplanets, but comparison against real observations would necessi-tate systematic incorporation of observables’ uncertain-ties in selecting x and evaluating f (J. J. Davey et al. 2025; J. J. C. Hayes et al. 2020). 2.3.4. Class O2 quantities 

Lastly, we record a large number of simulation out-put variables that are not accessible by remote sensing methods (Class O2). These outputs are computed as a result of the fully-coupled nature of our multi-physics simulator. Examples of these include: mantle melt frac-tion Φ m, surface temperature and pressure conditions, vertical atmospheric structure, planet bulk density, tidal heat flux, and the Bond albedo. Estimating these quan-tities is scientifically motivated as we ultimately strive to interpret exoplanets’ deep interior conditions, habit-ability, and provenance. 2.4. Prototypical exoplanets as case-studies 

This study presents a proof-of-concept for efficiently retrieving the lifetime histories of exoplanets using Bayesian statistics. To remain agnostic of observational uncertainties associated with specific real exoplanets, we generate three ground-truth baseline scenarios to rep-resent some hypothetical observations. These are in-formed by populations of exoplanets which are emerging from ongoing surveys: 

• (SN) A young, temperate ‘Sub-Neptune’ exo-planet. 

• (SE) An older, warm ‘Super-Earth’ exoplanet. 

• (TR) A hot, young ‘Terrestrial’ Earth-sized exo-planet. These are three representative prototypes of the wider exoplanet population, which enable us to study the sit-uations under which evolutionary retrievals are feasible. The three prototypical scenarios are differentiated by their Class P1 and P2 input parameters. We consider differences in three fixed parameters (Class P1): orbital semi-major axis, current planet age, and initial planet mass. These prototypes could readily be replaced with real planets that have had their properties constrained by observations. The semi-major axis is held fixed and an eccentricity 

e = 0 is adopted for each scenario (H. Nicholls et al. 2025a). We consider a host star of mass 0 .273 M⊙, mod-elled after L 98-59 (O. D. S. Demangeon et al. 2021; C. Cadieux et al. 2025). This M3-type star is a quiet M-dwarf that has been well-studied and for which a semi-synthetic emission spectrum is available from the Mega-MUSCLES database (P. R. Behr et al. 2023). The stellar spectrum evolves bolometrically and spectroscopically during the simulations, self-consistently with the planet (C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021). In application to real exo-planets, PROTEUS’ evolutionary retrievals could adopt stellar parameters appropriate to each specific scenario (C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021; I. Baraffe et al. 2015; R. Luger & R. Barnes 2015). We adopt an initial planet age of 50 Myr, relative to the host star age, which represents an early initial state after the stellar nebular and protoplanetary disk have dissipated (R. Kippenhahn et al. 2012; H. E. Schlicht-ing 2018; D. Valencia et al. 2025). Thus, simulation integration times tevo can be interpreted as present-day planet ages with a 50 Myr offset. These models neglect early accretion processes, atmospheric boil off after neb-ula dissipation, potential giant impacts, and orbital mi-gration (Y. Tang et al. 2024; J. G. Rogers & J. E. Owen 2021; H. E. Schlichting & S. Mukhopadhyay 2018; T. Kimura & M. Ikoma 2020; C. F. Chyba 1990). These three prototypes also differ by the Class P2 pa-rameters in Table 1 and 2, which are to be retrieved by our ABO retrievals (Section 2.2). 2.5. Static snapshot retrievals with InferAGNI 

Exoplanets’ current interior conditions can be infer-entially estimated from observations using static non-evolving models (D. Valencia et al. 2025; L. Zeng et al. 2019; C. Dorn et al. 2015). InferAGNI represents a 10 leading tool for inferring planets’ present-day internal and atmospheric structures, and already incorporates a physically comprehensive radiative-convective-chemical atmosphere model into its calculations (H. Nicholls et al. 2025b, 2026c). We directly compare our ABO evolution-ary retrievals against InferAGNI static retrievals, using the same three prototypical exoplanet cases. InferAGNI performs parameter retrieval using an affine-invariant Markov-chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) method through the ‘emcee’ Python package (D. Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013; W. R. Gilks 1996; J. Good-man & J. Weare 2010). The MCMC log-likelihood func-tion is evaluated using a regular grid linear interpola-tor forward model, constructed upon a pre-computed li-brary of 504000 diverse exoplanet scenarios (H. Nicholls et al. 2026c). These scenarios agnostically span a range of planet masses, envelope- and core-fractions, metal-licities, instellation fluxes, and host stars. Radial static structures are solved in 1D with a binary interior (metal-lic core and mantle) and overlying atmosphere. The interior equation of state assumes a fully-differentiated iron core and silicate MgSiO 3 silicate mantle, and is ap-plicable for planet masses up to 50 M⊕ (S. Seager et al. 2007). The atmosphere is solved using AGNI — the same atmosphere model applied in PROTEUS simu-lations (H. Nicholls et al. 2025b,c). The temperature structure is obtained self-consistently with the vapour mixing ratios by applying FastChem at thermochemi-cal equilibrium (D. Kitzmann et al. 2024; J. W. Stock et al. 2018). The MCMC algorithm performs 8000 steps across 14 simultaneous workers, before a thinning factor of 4 is applied to the flattened MCMC chains, and the final 5% of samples are selected for comparison against PROTEUS’ ABO. Controlled comparison between ABO and InferAGNI is enabled by their adoption of the same atmosphere model (AGNI) and conceptually equivalent constraints (Section 3.3). All of the Class O1 observables used to constrain ABO (Section 2.3) have analogous or identical quantities within the InferAGNI framework. Similarly, all of the estimated Class P2 parameters can be mapped from InferAGNI’s MCMC posteriors. Given their com-mon ground-truth scenarios (Section 2.4), differences in the two retrieval frameworks’ inferred planet structures and compositions reflect the efficacy an evolutionary re-trieval.  

> 3.

RESULTS 3.1. Establishing a ground-truth 

Firstly, we run three standalone PROTEUS simula-tions to establish ground-truth scenarios for our proto-typical exoplanet cases. The blue, green, and orange points in Figure 2 show the evolving radii Robs calcu-lated from these simulations, versus the planets’ fixed orbital periods. These simulations are contextualised by the radius-period distribution of the surveyed exo-planet population, drawn from exoplanet.eu, which is visualised by kernel-density estimate contours. The simulated photospheric radii of the ground-truth planets (blue, orange, green lines) are initially inflated due to their hot interior conditions, far from radiative equilibrium. This exposes them to large escape rates with large outgoing energy fluxes (E. D. Lopez 2017; L. A. Rogers 2015; J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017). Ther-mal radiation emission to space, balanced against stellar irradiation, causes their interiors to cool and partially crystallise. Their atmospheres contract according to the modelled atmospheric thermodynamics. Their calcu-lated atmospheric compositions evolve self-consistently with their thermal evolution and mass loss (Section 2.1) — Figure 7 plots the thermal and compositional evolu-tion of these three simulations. None of the cases com-pletely solidify; they terminate with Φ SN  

> m

= 63%, Φ SE  

> m

=82%, and Φ TR  

> m

= 30%. Permanent magma oceans are capable of efficiently sequestering their volatiles against atmospheric escape processes (C. Dorn & T. Lichtenberg 2021; M. M. Hirschmann 2012) and driving changes in atmospheric metallicity ratios (H. Nicholls et al. 2026b; L. Cesario et al. 2026). Overall, three prototypical cases act as representative members of their corresponding ex-oplanet populations. We attempt to retrieve their pa-rameters using the PROTEUS-derived observables in this proof-of-concept study. The SN and SE scenar-ios simultaneously probe the physics of hydrodynamic mass-loss and interior-atmosphere partitioning, in the sensitive regime around the radius valley (K. Heng et al. 2025; Y. Ito & M. Ikoma 2021; J. G. Rogers 2025). The TR case exhibits stark compositional evolution, testing how atmospheric constraints may alleviate mass-radius degeneracies via evolutionary modelling. The SN case (blue line in Figure 2) moves through a densely populated region of the phase space corre-sponding to the broader sub-Neptune population (J. G. Rogers 2025; D. Valencia et al. 2025). We adopt a geochemically reduced interior for this planet (Table 1) with a large initial hydrogen inventory, so this proto-type could be categorised as a ‘gas dwarf’ type sub-Neptune with a H 2-dominated atmosphere (Figure 7; R. Calder et al. (2026)). In reality, the sub-Neptune popu-lation may include a diversity of planetary structures and compositions (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2025). Fig-ure 2 demonstrates that the parameters chosen to de-fine our SN prototype are appropriate to represent the wider sub-Neptune population. Importantly, while its 11 10 0 10 1 10 2   

> Orbital period [days]
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> 1.2
> 1.4
> 1.6
> 1.8
> 2.0
> 2.2
> 2.4
> 2.6
> Planet radius [R  ]
> bc
> d
> e
> fg
> b
> c
> d
> b
> c
> d
> TRAPPIST-1
> Sub-Neptune
> L 98-59
> Super-Earth
> LP 791-18
> Terrestrial
> Figure 2. Simulated radius-period evolution of our three prototypical planets (blue, green, orange lines), adopted as ‘ground-truth’ scenarios. Grey contours visualise the Gaus-sian-kernel population density of the surveyed exoplanet pop-ulation, drawn from exoplanet.eu. The pink lines show em-pirical fits to the small-exoplanet radius valley, for a So-lar-mass star and an L 98-59-mass star (C. S. K. Ho & V. Van Eylen 2023).

radius evolves from ∼ 2.4 to ∼ 1.9R⊕, the planet re-mains above the radius valley after 1 Gyr of integration time (pink lines in Figure 2; C. S. K. Ho & V. Van Eylen (2023)). Leading theories suggest that super-Earths arise from sub-Neptune progenitors through multiple processes which conspire to remove their atmospheres and de-crease their radii (B. J. Fulton et al. 2017; T. J. David et al. 2021; L. A. Rogers 2015). These long-term pro-cesses overprint a range of potential post-formation sce-narios; e.g., formation interior or exterior to the ice and soot lines of their protoplanetary disks (J. Li et al. 2025; E. A. Bergin et al. 2023; S. Krijt et al. 2023; T. Lichten-berg et al. 2019; T. Kimura & M. Ikoma 2020; J. Ven-turini et al. 2020; R. Burn et al. 2024). The super-Earths population may comprise multiple sub-families of planet types (C. Cherubim et al. 2025; K. Heng et al. 2025). Our SE case is initialised with an intermedi-ately oxidised and metal-rich composition, and simu-lated over an extended integration time of 2 Gyr (Ta-ble 2). Its atmosphere transitions from CO-dominated to CH 4-dominated, while H 2O remains the subdominant component (Figure 7), driven by thermochemistry as the surface cools and the preferential loss of carbon rela-tive to hydrogen from the atmosphere (H. Nicholls et al. 2026b; L. Cesario et al. 2026; J. E. Dixon 1997; P. A. Sossi et al. 2023). Our SE case experiences a smaller ra-dius change than the SN case because of the abundance of heavier elements (C and O) which generate smaller atmospheric scale heights, although it remains suscep-tible to complete volatile loss. The SE evolves through a highly-populated region of radius-period space below the radius valley, so it can act as a representative of the super-Earth population (L. A. Rogers 2015; S. Ginzburg et al. 2016; C. S. K. Ho et al. 2024). The Terrestrial planet case (green) undergoes mini-mal absolute changes in its radius Robs , since its man-tle is initialised with oxidised conditions — compara-ble to Earth’s (D. J. Frost & C. A. McCammon 2008; R. W. Nicklas et al. 2018) — that generate high molec-ular weight atmospheres with small atmospheric scale heights (Figure 2). The TR case’s increased X-ray ir-radiation, compared to the SN and SE cases, cause hy-drodynamic removal of the majority of its initial car-bon inventory within the short 100 Myr integration time (Figure 7). Its atmosphere transitions from CO 2- to H2O-dominated through this interval, and there is a notable increase in H 2S abundance (D. J. Bower et al. 2022). This third scenario would represent a challeng-ing target for transmission spectroscopy with current observatories; its final photospheric radius 1 .07 R⊕ is small and largely set by the planet’s interior component 

Rint /R obs = 92% (S. Seager 2011; J. K. Barstow & K. Heng 2020). The compositional observables will be key constraints on its parameters for PROTEUS’ evolution-ary ABO retrievals (Table 1). 3.2. Retrieval via Bayesian optimisation 

Evolutionary retrievals are demonstrably feasible with asynchronous Bayesian optimisation. Overall, we find that PROTEUS’ ability to fit the observables with ABO — maximising f — depends on the leading-order physics active within each planetary regime. Figures 3 and 4 summarise these retrievals. Our results show that PROTEUS’ retrievals can converge upon the synthetic ground-truth observables despite an ‘expensive’ plane-tary evolution forward model. Figure 3 plots the evolutionary scenarios explored by PROTEUS during its ABO retrievals, for our three pro-totype exoplanets (columns). The first seven rows of coloured panels (rows a-g) show PROTEUS-simulated time evolution of the constraining Class O1 observables. Each line represents a single invocation of PROTEUS, with the best-fitting scenario that maximises the ob-jective function f plotted in black. The bottom three rows of Figure 3 (rows h-j) are Class O2 output variables calculated by PROTEUS, which are not observationally accessible and do not factor into f . Ground-truth val-ues are shown by unfilled circular markers. In parallel, 12 

(P1 ) Fixed parameter Sub-Neptune Super-Earth Terrestrial Accessibility Current planet age 1000 2000 100 Myr Stellar dating Semimajor axis 0.06 0.04 0.02 AU Radial velocity, transit timing Initial planet mass 3.0 1.9 1.0 M⊕ Radial velocity, transit timing (P2 ) Estimated parameter Sub-Neptune Super-Earth Terrestrial Accessibility Metallic core fraction [% radius] 35 40 55% radius Models and inference only 

Mantle oxygen fugacity (i.e., redox state) IW − 3.0 IW + 0 .5 IW + 3 .0 Models and inference only 

Initial bulk H inventory (H ppmw ) 10000 10000 2000 ppmw Models and inference only 

Initial bulk C inventory (C/H) 0.5 1.5 2.5 Models and inference only 

Initial bulk S inventory (S/H) 0.8 2.0 0.8 Models and inference only 

(O1 ) Observable variable’s truth value Sub-Neptune Super-Earth Terrestrial Accessibility Final photosphere radius 1.92 1.45 1.07 R⊕ Trans. spectroscopy Final photosphere temperature 313 409 582 K Trans. / Emit. spectroscopy Final photosphere gravity 8.09 9.11 8.58 m/s Trans. spectroscopy Final atmosphere molec. weight 4.1 18.9 25.6 g/mol Trans. / Emit. spectroscopy Final atmosphere C/O (wt.) 3.19 0.87 0.19 Trans. / Emit. spectroscopy Final atmosphere S/O (wt.) 1.07 0.57 0.12 Trans. / Emit. spectroscopy Final atmosphere O/H (wt.) 0.16 2.80 13.04 Trans. / Emit. spectroscopy 

Table 1. Three prototype exoplanet cases defining our ground-truths differ by their input parameters and synthetic observables. The fixed input parameters (Class P1) are held constant in each case, while the estimated parameters (Class P2) are retrieved by optimising calculated observables (Class O1) against ground-truth values. Fixed parameters and observables are observationally accessible; estimated parameters require modelling to constrain. 

(P2) Parameter Symbol Minimum Maximum Metallic core frac. rc 30 70% Mantle redox state ∆IW -4.0 +4.0 Initial bulk H inventory Hppmw 1000 20 000 Initial bulk C inventory C/H 0.1 4.0 Initial bulk S inventory S/H 0.1 4.0 

Table 2. Class P2 parameters’ minimum and maximum prior bounds. These quantities are estimated by Bayesian optimisation against ground-truth values on the Class O1 synthetic observable variables in Table 1. 

Figure 4 presents the Class P2 parameter combinations where PROTEUS dispatches evolutionary simulations (forward models) during its ABO retrievals (y-axes), versus the corresponding normalised objective function value f ′ (x-axis). Note that f ′ is a logarithmically-scaled measure for the goodness of fit. Square mark-ers in Figure 4 indicate ground-truth Class P2 param-eters, analogous to circular markers in Figure 3. The well-performing cases with accurately retrieved param-eters and observables are those where our best-fitting scenario (black) converges upon the ground-truth (un-filled markers). Table 3 quantifies best-fitting values and their relative linear errors. In the favourable physical regime of our TR case, evolutionary retrievals enable inference of its complete histories and provide deep insight into its interior con-ditions (Figure 3 column C). However, less favourable physical regimes (our SN and SE cases; Figure 4 columns A and B) can make optimisation of certain parameters difficult, while facing the same degeneracies as the ex-isting static-structure retrieval paradigm (C. Dorn et al. 2015; L. Zeng et al. 2019; S. Seager et al. 2007; C. Huang et al. 2022). We present each exoplanet in subsections below. 3.2.1. Sub-Neptune case 

PROTEUS’ ABO retrieval is able to reproduce sev-eral of the SN case’s ground-truth observable values with good accuracy. Under the best-fitting scenario, 

f = −0.35. For example, a small error of 5.9% is ob-tained on atmospheric S/O, which enables estimation of the planet’s physically-correlated initial S/H budget (Figure 4Ae). The evolutionary retrieval of this SN pro-totype is able to infer the planet’s initial sulfur budget, by resolving the control S/H has over its present-day atmospheric S/O ratio. The SN’s retrieved Robs is 21.1% below the ground-truth value (Figure 3Aa). The under-estimated radius value leads to an over-estimated core mass fraction and under-estimated initial volatile budget (Figure 4Aa/Ac). The core-building material is denser than the mantle-building material, and smaller volatile budgets outgas thinner atmospheres, which yields smaller photospheric radii. The SN ground-truth is configured with a reduc-ing mantle (∆IW = −3) and large initial volatile in-ventory (H ppmw = 10 4). This geochemical regime out-13 gasses H 2-dominated atmospheres with small molecular weights and large scale heights, regardless of the sur-face and interior thermal conditions. Insensitivity be-tween the compositionally-related Class O1 observables (μobs , C/O, O/H) and the esimtaed Class P2 parame-ters (∆IW, H ppmw , C/H) inhibits accurate parameter estimation. Misfit on the SN’s photospheric temperature, Tobs , is small (0.2%; Figure 3Ab). A good fit is obtained be-cause upper-atmospheric temperature structure is pri-marily determined by the bolometric irradiation flux, which is decoupled from the Class P2 parameters varied here, except through their control over Rayleigh scatter-ing. Future incorporation of orbital migration physics would lead to variations in Tobs as a function of inferred Class P2 parameters. 3.2.2. Super-Earth case 

The super-Earth retrieval terminates with a closer best-fit to the ground-truth ( f = −0.19). This planet exists within a regime strongly shaped by atmospheric escape — in the adopted energy-limited regime, atmo-spheric mass loss scales as ∝ R3XUV FXUV . The planet’s radius evolves throughout the simulated evolution (Fig-ure 2) and creates a large cross-section for X-ray ab-sorption to drive photoevaporation, so complete atmo-spheric erosion arises in some of the PROTEUS simu-lations probed during the ABO retrieval (Figure 3Bi). The outgassed atmosphere is dominated by carbon-bearing species (Figure 7d) which are poorly soluble in the planet’s magma ocean, so carbon atoms dominate the hydrodynamically escaping outflow (D. J. Bower et al. 2022; J. E. Dixon 1997). Further evolution of this planet would drive continued changes in its observ-ables, so simulation timing — corresponding to planet ages — directly shapes the synthetic observables com-pared against the ground-truth constraints when evalu-ating the objective function (Equation 1). Differential interior-atmosphere partitioning between the volatile elements, alongside escape, drives evolu-tion in observable μobs , S/O, C/O, and O/H (Fig-ure 3Bc,e,f,g). With its mildly reducing redox state ∆IW = +0 .5 and sensitivity to photoevaporative car-bon depletion, compared to sulfur retention, the SE case accesses a diversity of atmospheric compositions. The Class O1 observables μobs and S/O (misfits of 4.8% and 6.7%) enable PROTEUS to accurately estimate the SE ground-truth mantle’s oxidation state as being mildly reducing (∆IW = +1 .2; Figure 4Bb). Although the PROTEUS’ ABO retrieval converges upon SE’s ground-truth photospheric radius (8.3% mis-fit; Figure 3Ba), it struggles to accurately infer the SE core fraction and initial volatile budget (Figure 4Ba,c). This planet’s propensity for atmosphere erosion biases evolutionary pathways towards small surface pressures (Figure 3Bi), so the retrieval favours low-density interi-ors with small metallic core fractions — rather than ex-tended atmospheres — to obtain a good fit on the radius (Figure 4Ba,c). Similarly to the SN case, this behaviour is a known degeneracy between atmosphere- and core-mass fractions, established by current static-structure approaches (C. T. Unterborn & W. R. Panero 2019; C. Dorn et al. 2015; L. Zeng et al. 2019). We note that PROTEUS explores a narrow range of H ppmw during the SE retrieval case, near the Bayesian prior’s lower bound and far below the ground-truth’s value (Figure 4Bc). 3.2.3. Terrestrial case 

Our final scenario, a warm Terrestrial prototype, presents the best evolutionary retrieval performance (f = +1 .33). Its adopted physical regime and prop-erties enable favourable correlation between observables and parameters, so all the Class O1 observables are well fit: black lines converge upon the ground-truth values shown by unfilled green markers in Figure 3 column C. Excellent correspondence between our best-fitting and ground-truth TR observables enables the accurate esti-mation of the TR prototype’s hidden Class P2 parame-ters (black point in Figure 4 column C; Table 3). The TR case’s surface conditions and atmospheric composition evolve together throughout the explored evolutionary pathways (Figure 3Ce-Cj). Elemental ra-tios evolve non-monotonically across multiple orders of magnitude: not resolvable by static models since the driving physical processes are time-dependent. Man-tle solidification continually decreases the reservoir of molten material capable of efficiently storing H2O, thereby degassing initial volatiles and exposing them to hydrodynamic escape (H. Nicholls et al. 2026b; R. Arora et al. 2026). Atmospheric molecular weight decreases as its initially CO 2-dominated composition becomes di-luted with degassed H 2O (Figure 3Cd,h; D. J. Bower et al. (2022); L. Cesario et al. (2026)). The total sur-face pressure generally exhibits a net decrease over time, although many cases experience complete atmospheric erosion (Figure 3Ci). Of the observables probing atmospheric composition — metallicity ratios and atmospheric molecular weight — the largest misfit is in S/O (14.8%) and smallest is in μobs (0.6%). Well-fit observables enable accurate es-timates of the TR planet’s initial volatile inventory; the best-fit scenario finds C /H = 2 .7 and H ppmw = 1570 compared to the ground-truth’s 2.5 and 2000, respec-tively. Convergence on to 21% misfit on H ppmw (1570 14 versus 2000 ppmw initial bulk-planetary hydrogen con-tent) is a small error; we anticipate wide diversity in the hydrogen budgets afforded between the exoplanets being observed — depending on their provenance (P. A. Sossi et al. 2025; H. E. Schlichting 2018), early accretion (T. Kimura & T. Lichtenberg 2026; B. Bitsch et al. 2019), and protracted exposure to atmospheric escape (K. J. Zahnle et al. 1988; E. S. Kite et al. 2020) — exemplified by the order-of-magnitude uncertainties in Earth’s own present-day water budget (A. H. Peslier et al. 2017). Accurate retrieval estimates of the TR planet’s initial volatile budget strongly brackets the range of late-stage surface pressures compatible with observations, despite 

Psurf not being directly observable (Figure 3Ci). Along-side compositional measures, initial volatile content is jointly inferred from the radius constraint ( Robs misfit of 4.8%); simultaneously modelling atmospheric physics and chemistry lifts the degeneracy on the bulk density faced by our SN and SE cases. The TR planet’s best-fitting core fraction rc = 63% thereby obtains a small misfit 12.7%, in contrast to ∼ 25% for the SN and SE scenarios (c.f., Table 3). Spectroscopic observations estimate metallicity ratios and mean molecular weights more readily than the abun-dances of specific molecules (N. Madhusudhan 2012; V. Parmentier et al. 2018; V. Soni & K. Acharyya 2023; C. Piaulet et al. 2023). Modelling connects these quanti-ties. For example, a narrow range of H 2O mixing ratios are thermochemically compatible with a given O/H ra-tio (D. Kitzmann et al. 2024; J. Taylor et al. 2026). Figure 3Ch shows that a range of H 2O volume mixing ratios can arise from the scenarios explored by PRO-TEUS’ retrieval algorithm. Yet, the best-fitting case reproduces our ground-truth H 2O mixing ratio (61% at the surface) with a misfit error of 7.6%. The estimation of particular molecular abundances provides insight into exoplanet’s climatic conditions and potential for habit-ability (N. Madhusudhan et al. 2023a; O. Shorttle et al. 2024; N. F. Wogan et al. 2024; B. Benneke et al. 2024). 3.3. Evolutionary versus static retrieval approaches 

We now directly compare our evolutionary-retrieval framework to the current static-retrieval paradigm, in their ability to infer exoplanets’ observationally-inaccessible interior conditions. The ground-truth sce-narios have optically thick atmospheres which would shroud their surfaces from direct observation, so their interior phase states would only be inferentially char-acterisable. We use the planets’ pressure-temperature (P -T ) conditions as a phase space for comparing evolu-tionary (PROTEUS; Section 2.2) and static (InferAGNI; Section 2.5) approaches. Figure 5 plots the P-T conditions explored by both re-trieval methods, when applied to each exoplanet proto-type (panels). We reference these conditions against our ground-truth (unfilled markers) and contextualise them with mantle melting and H 2-H 2O miscibility boundaries (red-dashed and blue-dash-dotted lines, respectively). We flatten the MCMC sampler’s walkers and derive pos-teriors from the final 5% of MCMC samples (pink con-tours in Figure 5), which can be interpreted as being best-fitting static retrieval estimates of the three ex-oplanets’ surface conditions. In comparison, greyscale lines show all 100 pathways of evolving P-T conditions simulated by PROTEUS during each ABO retrieval — including poorly-fitting initial guesses (thinner lines), better fits (thicker lines), and the best-fitting scenarios (black lines). Note the inverted y-axis. Overall, we find that evolutionary retrievals can pro-vide greater physical insight into the surface conditions of sub-Neptune, super-Earth, and terrestrial-mass ex-oplanets. Modelled surface P-T conditions evolve past the ground-truth, while the static approach has low pre-cision and can be biased towards cooler surfaces. We discuss each exoplanet case in the subsections below. 3.3.1. Sub-Neptune case 

In the sub-Neptune case, InferAGNI retrieval posteri-ors and PROTEUS’ simulated evolution pathways con-verge upon similar surface P-T conditions (Figure 5a). The static-retrieval’s posterior on surface conditions (Tsurf = 1404 +185  

> −150

K; pink contours) probes P-T pair-ings comparable to the end states of PROTEUS simu-lations (grey points), for which the best-fitting evolu-tionary simulation terminates with Tsurf = 1626 K, at 1 Gyr (black point). Correspondence between the two approaches can be understood by considering the SN’s parameter regime and our model choices. Firstly, fol-lowing from Section 3.2, the reducing conditions defin-ing our SN prototype (Table 1) generate atmospheres strongly dominated by H 2 (N. Katyal et al. 2020; D. J. Bower et al. 2025). Changes to surface temperature and pressure have little impact on the observable pho-tospheric Robs and μobs , allowing degenerate parame-ter combinations to produce observables consistent with the SN ground-truth. This is the same ongoing challenge ambiguating real sub-Neptunes’ interior conditions from telescope observations (N. Madhusudhan 2019; T. Licht-enberg et al. 2025). Secondly, both retrieval approaches incorporate the same radiative-convective-chemical code (AGNI) to simulate the planet’s atmospheric structure, while being constrained by the same ground-truth ob-servations, so similar surface conditions will necessarily generate the same Class O1 observables. 15 1.0  

> 1.5
> 2.0 Robs
> [R ]

Sub-Neptune 

> (Aa)

Super-Earth 

> (Ba)

Terrestrial                       

> (Ca)
> 0
> 300
> 600
> 900
> Tobs
> [K]
> (Ab) (Bb) (Cb)
> 8
> 12
> 16
> 20 gobs
> [m/s 2]
> (Ac) (Bc) (Cc)
> 5
> 15
> 25
> 35
> obs
> [g/mol]
> (Ad) (Bd) (Cd)
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> C/O (Ae) (Be) (Ce)
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> S/O (Af) (Bf) (Cf)
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> O/H (Ag) (Bg) (Cg)
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75 H2O
> [%]
> (Ah) (Bh) (Ch)
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Psurf
> [kbar]
> (Ai) (Bi) (Ci)

10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 10 9

> 1000
> 2000
> 3000 Tsurf
> [K]
> (Aj)

10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8 10 9

> (Bj)

10 5 10 6 10 7 10 8

> (Cj)
> Model output variables

Simulated planet age [yr], after t = 50 Myr 

Figure 3. Simulated observable variables calculated by PROTEUS (rows) as a function of planet age (x-axes), for our three prototypical exoplanet scenarios (columns). Ground-truth observables are shown by unfilled circle markers in each panel. Class O1 observables (coloured rows) are used to constrain the retrieval, with ground-truth values shown by unfilled circles. Grey rows, labelled with †, show Class O2 quantities not used in fitting. Black lines show best-fitting scenario. Values and errors are presented in Table 3. 40 

> 50
> 60

Core 

frac 

[%] 

Sub-Neptune 

(Aa) 

Super-Earth 

(Ba) 

Terrestrial 

(Ca) 

> 4
> 2
> 0
> 2
> 4

fO2

[ IW] 

(Ab) (Bb) (Cb) 

> 10 3
> 10 4

Initial 

Hppmw 

(Ac) (Bc) (Cc) 

> 0
> 2
> 4

Initial 

C/H 

(Ad) (Bd) (Cd) 

40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

> 0
> 2
> 4

Initial 

S/H 

(Ae) 

40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

(Be) 

40 50 60 70 80 90 100 

(Ce) 

> Parameter variables

Normalised objective function f′ (best=100) 

Figure 4. Parameter evaluation locations x (y-axes) and their normalised objectives f ′ value (x-axes) explored by PROTEUS’ ABO retrievals, corresponding to the same simulations as Figure 3. Best-fitting solutions are indicated by the black points (Table 3). Ground-truth values on the parameters (Table 1) are shown by unfilled square markers at f ′ = 100. Some parameters are better estimated than others, depending on the planet (columns and colours). 16 The best-fitting evolutionary retrieval approximates the SN ground-truth surface conditions ( Tsurf = 1797 K; blue circle) with better accuracy than the static-retrieval’s posterior median: 9.5% versus 21.8% rela-tive error on Tsurf , respectively. The InferAGNI al-gorithm explores cooler surface conditions and higher surface pressures (pink contours in Figure 5a) than the PROTEUS-ABO approach, because PROTEUS mod-els evolve over a range of large internal luminosities that arise from initially molten interiors — equivalent to 

Tint > 0 K (P. A. Noti & E. K. H. Lee 2024; H. Nicholls et al. 2025c; J. J. Fortney et al. 2008). PROTEUS simulations model a suite of time-evolving processes which conspire to limit the set of physically permissible surface conditions within the wider P-T phase space (grey lines in Figure 5a and Figure 3Bj). The range of conditions spanned by these pathways is determined by variations in our retrieved Class P2 pa-rameters (Table 1). Importantly, these physical con-straints mean that PROTEUS’ ABO retrieval algo-rithm does not probe the lower Psurf < 6000 bar con-ditions suggested by the static-structure retrieval poste-rior (pink contour), so the best-fitting evolutionary case sits within the same region of P-T space as the ground-truth (blue marker). All SN cases remain immiscible above the H 2-H 2O demixing binodal (S. Howard et al. 2025). The best-fitting SN scenario (black line; Figure 5a) does not terminate at the same P-T conditions as the ground truth. Instead, it evolves closely past the blue marker and overshoots towards cooler conditions with lower surface pressures. Atmospheric escape only marginally decreases the surface pressure during its 1 Gyr evolution; changes in the SN’s radius are driven by cooling and thermal contraction (H. Nicholls et al. 2026b; Y. Tang et al. 2025a; E. D. Lopez et al. 2012). Had the best-fitting SN simulation terminated earlier — at a point between the 115 and 220 Myr PRO-TEUS time-steps — it would have obtained strong cor-respondence to the ground-truth’s P-T conditions (blue marker). 3.3.2. Super-Earth case 

Compared to the sub-Neptune case, both retrieval approaches provide relatively poor estimates for our super-Earth’s surface conditions (Figure 5b). The SE prototype is intentionally constructed in a parameter regime where sensitive physical feedbacks make a diverse range of atmospheric compositions and structures pos-sible (Figure 7d; C. Cherubim et al. (2025); F. Gaillard et al. (2021); D. J. Bower et al. (2025)). This planet is defined with the oldest age (longest integration time) and its final surface conditions sit on the silicate solidus, so physics provides only a narrow window for retaining thick atmospheres with specific compositions 2 Gyr after its formation (Table 1). The SE planet’s exposure to competing physical pro-cesses does introduce parameter-observable relation-ships that can enable precise estimation on the inferred Class P2 parameters, such as its C/H ratio with a small 13.7% misfit (Section 4.1). However, Figure 5b demon-strates that both retrieval approaches are unable to con-verge upon the SE ground-truth’s P-T conditions be-fore exhausting their allocated computer resources. The best-fitting PROTEUS simulation overshoots towards the thinner atmospheres and cooler surfaces comparable to the static-structure median ( Tsurf = 1346 K versus 1403 +27  

> −16

K, and Psurf = 1946 bar versus 1267 392  

> −155

bar; Table 3). The ABO algorithm preferentially explores the Bayesian prior’s lower-limit on initial volatile con-tent (H ppmw in Table 2), which is where the retrieval’s bootstrapping samples were randomly initialised. The relative inaccessibility of the SE ground-truth’s condi-tions to retrieval makes PROTEUS’ ABO retrievals sus-ceptible to the same mass-radius degeneracy inhibiting the static approach. 3.3.3. Terrestrial case 

Section 3.2 presented PROTEUS retrievals of the Ter-restrial prototype — representing our best perform-ing case study. Its modelled observables evolve non-monotonically and are strongly correlated to the inferred Class P2 parameters, enabling insight into the physics actively shaping its final state and hidden interior con-ditions (Figure 3 column C). Physics permits a wide range of surface pressures and temperatures for this planet, since it may readily lose its atmospheric blanketing effect through hydrodynamic es-cape (K. Hamano et al. 2013; H. Nicholls et al. 2026a; Y. Ito & M. Ikoma 2021), whilst remaining strongly heated by stellar radiation on a short orbital period. Sev-eral exploratory PROTEUS simulations terminate with thinner atmospheres Psurf < 90 bar and cooler surfaces 

Tsurf < 1250 K, having evolved through a wide range of earlier states (grey lines in Figure 5c); PROTEUS ap-propriately disfavours these poorly-fitting scenarios. In comparison, InferAGNI’s TR posterior spans multiple surface regimes, including those with permanent magma oceans (right of dashed red line) and immiscible H 2-H 2Oconditions (below dash-dotted blue line). However, the ground-truth’s final surface tempera-ture is 1558 K, so a direct comparison of the best-fitting PROTEUS scenario’s final surface temperature (1379 K) would suggest it has worse performance in estimating 17 

Tsurf than the static-retrieval approach (1560 K poste-rior median). Note that the MCMC posterior on surface pressure has a large relative uncertainty that exceeds unity ( Psurf = 4792 +9261  

> −3001

bar; pink contour). A wide range of surface pressures are available to the InferAGNI retrieval as it jointly varies its atmosphere mass-fraction alongside the core mass-fraction parameters, to make up the same total radius Robs and mass Mp. Earlier ter-mination of the best-fitting evolutionary scenario (black line) — at integration times between 73 and 99 Myr — would yield a better 1529 K estimate for the ground-truth’s surface temperature, so timing remains a key determiner of accurate P-T inference. 3.4. Comparison of optimisation schemes 

Tools used to interpret exoplanet observations strive for computational performance; enabling broader pa-rameter exploration, comprehensive modelling of the rel-evant physics, and insight into population-level trends (J. K. Barstow & K. Heng 2020; Y. Rotman et al. 2025; C. Fisher & K. Heng 2022). Yet, computational re-sources are limited, and many codes run on single CPU cores. Efficient retrieval algorithms mitigate this tension (E. O. Garvin et al. 2024; N. Madhusudhan & S. Seager 2009; D. Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013). It is unclear, apriori , which algorithms and functions are best suited to this application of asynchronous Bayesian optimisation. Here, we consider three suites of acquisition functions, Gaussian process kernels, and distributions of CPU re-sources. We run a series of additional PROTEUS ABO retrievals where the baseline configuration is identical to the previous sections (Section 2.2). We adopt the same Terrestrial planet ground-truth Class O1 observ-ables and inferential Class P2 parameters (Table 1). Figure 6 presents the scaling behaviours of PRO-TEUS’ Bayesian retrievals, depending on the adopted retrieval configuration (line colours). Each panel plots the normalised objective function f ′ (scatter points) cal-culated by each invocation of PROTEUS simulations, versus the index of that PROTEUS simulation during the particular retrieval instance. The log-transformed objective f is normalised to the best-fitting case in each panel, f ′ = 100 f /f best , such that f ′ = 100 represents the best-fitting solution and the values f ′ < 0 are plot-ted at f ′ = 0. Solid lines plot the best-seen f ′ versus each evaluation number. 3.4.1. Acquisition functions 

Figure 6a presents retrieval scaling behaviour using three analytical acquisition functions (line and point colours). The retrievals with UCB and LogEI functions converge upon a similar best-fitting scenario. LogEI de-termines its best f = +1 .33 after 68 PROTEUS evalu-1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500   

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Psurf  [bar]
> MCMC posterior (static) Best fit (evolution) Truth

(a) Sub-Neptune 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500 

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Psurf  [bar]

(b) Super-Earth 1000 1250 1500 1750 2000 2250 2500 

> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Psurf  [bar]

(c) Terrestrial 

Figure 5. Surface pressure-temperature conditions explored through both static and evolutionary retrieval approaches, for three exoplanet cases (panels). Note the inverted y-axis. Pink contours show the posterior density of best-fitting sam-ple points, from the final 5% of the flattened MCMC chain of static-structure InferAGNI retrievals. Greyscale lines show individual PROTEUS simulations dispatched during evolu-tionary retrievals; endpoints are indicated with dots and best-fitting simulations are highlighted in black (Table 3). The ground-truth Psurf -Tsurf are shown by blue, orange, and green vertical/horizontal lines and the unfilled mark-ers. Dashed red line plots a silicate solidus, demarcating molten and solidified surfaces (A. S. Wolf & D. J. Bower 2018). Dash-dotted blue line shows an analytical fit for the H2-H 2O de-mixing binodal, calculated using the H 2O mixing ratios of the ground-truth scenarios (S. Howard et al. 2025; A. Bergermann et al. 2024; K. Vlasov et al. 2023). 

ations, but then shows no further improvement before the retrieval process terminates at 100 complete PRO-TEUS simulations (black line in Figure 6). The UCB function marginally outperforms the LogEI baseline af-ter 91 PROTEUS simulations (best f = +1 .38, pink line). The LogPI configuration begins with a better ini-tial guess from its bootstrapping, but it performs poorly 18 during the retrieval and continuously explores badly fit-ting scenarios, even after > 90 PROTEUS simulations (cyan line). Both LogEI and UCB require approximately 55 PRO-TEUS simulations for f to be substantially increased beyond their initial guess (black and pink lines in Fig-ure 6a). Sensitivity tests which extended the LogEI case to 200 simulations showed no further improvement upon 

f = +1 .33 (not shown). The LogEI acquisition function converges upon its best-fitting objective f sooner than the UCB, ending with only a marginally worse f ′; we conclude that LogEI is the preferred acquisition function for this task. We do not find it necessary to adopt a penalisation-based acqui-sition function since each acquisition is more informed than the previous one (Figure 1; B. Riegler et al. (2026); C. E. Rasmussen & C. K. I. Williams (2005)). 3.4.2. Gaussian process kernels 

Figure 6b presents retrieval performing with the Lo-gEI acquisition function, but considers four Gaussian process kernel configurations (Section 2.2.3). Larger val-ues of the Mat´ ern kernel smoothing parameter ν are able to resolve greater sensitives in the objective f as a func-tion of x. The Mat´ ern kernel is smoothest in the limit of ν → ∞ , where is it equivalent to the RBF. We find that the RBF kernel has the worst retrieval performance (pink line in Figure 6b); its best objective 

f = −0.05 is found after 13 iterations and does not im-prove before the 100 evaluations are completed. This result reflects Section 3.2: the physics resolved by PRO-TEUS’ planetary evolution simulations are particularly sensitive to the retrieved Class P2 parameters in the Ter-restrial planet’s regime, where a diverse range of oxi-dised atmospheres are simultaneously shaped by magma ocean outgassing and hydrodynamic escape. Previous studies have established that smooth Gaussian process kernels cannot capture sensitives inherent to complex physical processes (M. L. Stein 1999). Retrieval performance is not a monotonic function of the kernel smoothness: the RBF is equivalent to 

ν → ∞ , yet the smoothest Mat´ ern kernel achieves the best objective f = +1 .42 across all kernel configura-tions after 65 PROTEUS simulations ( ν = 5 /2, brown line). The roughest Mat´ ern configuration marginally improves upon our ν = 3 /2 baseline, which has the best f = +1 .33 after 68 simulations. Our intermediate-smoothness ν = 3 /2 configuration presents performance intermediate to the other kernels, although it shows no improvement to f after 43 simulations. We conclude that a Mat´ ern covariance function with 

ν = 5 /2 may be the most appropriate choice as a ker-nel for this task since it obtains the best objective f ′ —all else equal — and presents reliable improvement as a function of simulation count (x-axis). However, modi-fications to the underlying PROTEUS code — e.g., by incorporation of orbital dynamics — may yield physical sensitivities that are better represented by a different functional form or smoothness parameter. 3.4.3. Worker numbers 

Figure 6c uses the LogEI acquisition function and Mat´ ern ν = 3 /2 kernel from our baseline configuration, but considers different numbers of simultaneous work-ers. Our PROTEUS ABO retrievals are run with a pre-defined number of CPU cores, with one worker process per core. Each worker asynchronously dispatches a new PROTEUS simulation — immediately after its previ-ous simulation terminates — informed by the acquisi-tion function and the Gaussian process which has been constructed from previous PROTEUS simulations (Sec-tion 2.2). Regardless of worker allocations, each retrieval expires after 100 PROTEUS simulations have been per-formed. The choice of 3 workers marginally outperforms our baseline retrieval 5-worker configuration (best f =+1 .43 versus f = 1 .33) after 97 PROTEUS simulations have run, although the 5-worker configuration finds its best f sooner. In general, we find improved retrieval performance with fewer simultaneous workers; configu-rations with 10 or 15 workers show negligible improve-ment in f after 53 PROTEUS simulations are performed and have poorer best-fitting objective values f at 100 PROTEUS simulations. This behaviour arises from our BO dispatch scheme and fixed 100 simulation budget, since a smaller number of simultaneous workers allows each BO selection of parameters x to follow from greater number of previous simulations, rather than being dis-patched concurrently (B. Riegler et al. 2026; G. De Ath et al. 2021).  

> 4.

DISCUSSION 4.1. Retrievals across billions of years 

Exoplanets’ initial and current states are accessible from present-day observations when parameter inference is approached as a retrieval problem that incorporates planetary evolution forward models. We have applied computationally expensive planetary evolution simula-tions to model the physics connecting planets’ earliest conditions to their currently observed states. Our ma-chine learning framework uses asynchronous Bayesian optimisation to dispatch these models, extending be-yond the current static-snapshot paradigm. However, evolutionary retrieval performance and efficiency varies 19 0                         

> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100 (a)
> Acqstn
> function
> UCB
> LogEI
> LogPI
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100 (b) GP
> kernel
> RBF
> Mat1/2
> Mat3/2
> Mat5/2
> 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
> Index of PROTEUS simulation
> 0
> 20
> 40
> 60
> 80
> 100 (c)
> Workers
> 3
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Normalised objective  f′ (best=100)
> Figure 6. Scaling behaviours of PROTEUS’ asynchronous Bayesian optimisation retrievals applied to our Terrestrial exoplanet prototype. Scatter points plot the normalised ob-jective function f′against the dispatched evaluation number (x-axis). Lines quantify the best-fitting f′seen. Top : three acquisition functions (Section 2.2.2). Middle :four Gaus-sian process kernel functions (Section 2.2.3). Bottom : four different numbers of parallel worker processes (3, 5, 10, and 15 CPU cores). The baseline retrieval configuration follows Section 2.2.

depending on the planetary and physical regimes con-sidered. Evolutionary retrieval of our SN prototype accurately constrains the planet’s initial sulfur budget (our S/H pa-rameter) by connection with an observed S/O ratio. At-mospheric S/O ratio is accessible through transmission spectroscopy targeting SO 2, CS 2, and H 2S absorption features (I. Panagiotou et al. 2026; F. Dai et al. 2026; S. Jordan et al. 2026). Atmospheric S/O is also physically correlated with mantle redox conditions, because the sol-ubility of sulfide S 2– ions in molten silicate materials is sensitive to mantle redox conditions (proxied by ∆IW; O. Namur et al. (2016)). Our SE retrieval demonstrates that mantle redox conditions can be inferred from these observables, by self-consistently incorporating thermo-chemistry and interior-atmosphere volatile partitioning into forward models (Y. Ito & Q. Changeat 2026; N. F. Wogan et al. 2024). This finding stands in contrast to the common adoption of free-chemistry retrievals within the literature, which can preferentially infer physically infeasible combinations of chemical species (N. Mad-husudhan et al. 2023b; A. F. Al-Refaie et al. 2022; C. N. Luu et al. 2024; C. Piaulet et al. 2023). Future applica-tions of our evolutionary retrievals could enable PRO-TEUS’ module for chemical kinetics (VULCAN; S.-M. Tsai et al. (2024); S.-M. Tsai et al. (2021)), since disequi-librium photochemistry can imprint observable signa-tures (I. Panagiotou et al. 2026; F. Dai et al. 2026; S.-M. Tsai et al. 2023; H. Nicholls et al. 2023). To enable direct comparisons against future JWST and ELT measure-ments, synthetic transmission spectra (P. Molliere et al. 2019) could be derived from our radiative-convective at-mosphere modelling — accounting for aerosol complex-ities — potentially with a χ2 formulation for f (J. K. Barstow 2020; R. J. MacDonald & N. K. Lewis 2022; C. Fairman et al. 2024; J. K. Barstow et al. 2015). Our multi-physics PROTEUS forward model esti-mates values on planetary parameters which are not di-rectly observable, including those inaccessible to current static-structure approaches. For example, on our ∆IW Class P2 parameter, which represents the upper-mantle redox state of these simulated planets (M. Sastre et al. 2026). Estimation of ∆IW acts to probe the multiple simultaneously-acting processes which set the redox con-ditions of planetary interiors (Section 2.1). Terrestrial-mass planets remain observationally difficult targets, in comparison to sub-Neptunes and super-Earths, because of their decreased planet-to-star size and flux ratios. Yet, good performance within the oxidised terrestrial planet regime may enable deep physical insight, when observables are accessible (N. Madhusudhan et al. 2016). Estimates of Earth’s present hydrogen and carbon bud-gets vary across two orders of magnitude (A. H. Peslier et al. 2017; W. C. Clark 1982). So, placing accurate constraints on exoplanet’s initial volatile inventories — even to within an order of magnitude — is sufficient for identifying specific formation scenarios; i.e., where this planet formed within the protoplanetary disk relative to the water ice-line and soot-line, and the efficiency of primordial envelope boil-off (J. Li et al. 2025; T. Licht-enberg et al. 2019; L. Boitard-Crepeau et al. 2025; S. Krijt et al. 2023; Y. Tang et al. 2024; S. Ginzburg et al. 2018). We self-consistently model these planets’ evolving at-mospheric chemistry and vertical structures, so obser-vational measures of composition jointly constrain the retrievals alongside the planets’ observable bulk proper-ties (e.g., their radii). This approach is demonstrated to lift degeneracies on exoplanets’ interior structures and redox conditions (Figure 4Bb,Cb). Estimation of real planets’ metallic core fractions enables discussion on their exposure to early collisional processes (B. Char-lier & O. Namur 2019), giant impacts (S. J. Lock et al. 2018; P. Franco et al. 2025), the redox conditions of their deep mantles (T. Lichtenberg 2021; J. F. Kasting 20 et al. 1993), and mineralogies (L. Schaefer et al. 2024; H. L. Zhang et al. 2024). Timing arises as a key de-terminer for accurate insight into exoplanets’ potential habitability and deep interiors. The super-solidus con-ditions suggested by PROTEUS’ best-fitting SN solu-tion accurately reproduce the ground-truth’s permanent magma ocean regime (A. S. Wolf & D. J. Bower 2018; R. Calder et al. 2026). The best-fitting retrieval scenario passes through the ground truth’s surface conditions during its evolution (black line in Figure 5a), although it eventually overshoots towards cooler surface condi-tions. The physics resolved by PROTEUS permits rul-ing against solidified surface conditions, while static In-ferAGNI retrievals remain agnostic, despite their identi-cal observationally-derived constraints. Planet ages are observationally accessible through stellar dating; e.g., with the asteroseismological component of the upcoming PLATO mission (H. Rauer et al. 2025; C. Aerts 2021). Our Super-Earth and Terrestrial cases show similar be-haviours, so model timing emerges as a key determiner in estimating exoplanet’s surface conditions. The PROTEUS simulations begin simulated evolution from a molten magma ocean state (L. Elkins-Tanton 2008; W. B. Tonks & H. J. Melosh 1993) and consider continuous radiogenic internal heat production — heat from both sources must eventually be radiated to space, through an outgassed atmosphere, for the planets to cool and deflate — offset by incoming irradiation (K. Lodders & B. Fegley 1998; P. A. Noti & E. K. H. Lee 2024; H. Nicholls et al. 2025c; J. Cmiel et al. 2025). Since PROTEUS simulations include a suite of cou-pled physical processes, they cannot access physically unrealistic conditions that might be permissible for a ‘free’ or reduced-physics retrieval. For example, retain-ing ≳ 1wt% low-metallicity atmospheres on small exo-planets for billions of years is likely unrealistic, due to their continuous photoevaporation (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; L. A. Rogers 2015; S. E. Moran et al. 2023). Re-solving these multiple interacting physical effects means that our prototypical planets may explore different sur-face conditions to those suggested by static retrieval ap-proaches. Our SN evolutionary retrieval does not per-mit cool Tsurf < 1250 K surfaces, while InferAGNI static retrievals do (Figure 5a). Physics is a natural ‘prior’ against certain conditions and parameter combinations (R. J. MacDonald et al. 2020). In some cases, evolutionary retrievals can be limited by the same degeneracies faced by existing static ap-proaches. This is best demonstrated by our SN case, where the best-fitting scenario’s observed radius under-estimates the ground-truth’s value (Figure 3Aa). We attribute this behaviour to the planet’s extremely re-ducing interior conditions, which preferentially outgas H2-dominated atmospheres. For example, when PRO-TEUS’ ABO samples mantle oxygen fugacities ∆IW = 

−2, rather than ∆IW = −3, the atmospheric radius re-mains largely unaffected (H. Nicholls et al. 2026c; P. A. Sossi et al. 2020; R. Arora et al. 2026). H2-preference and decoupling from compositional parameters means that the SN’s radius is degenerate with the core frac-tion and initial volatile budget parameters (Figure 4Aa, Ac). Similarly, a given mean molecular weight can be achieved with enhancement of S and C abundances in different proportions (e.g., the SE scenario). 4.2. Future modelling and development 

Going forward, it will be important to allow models to explore ‘exotic’ parameter regimes. We can identify these theoretically, by searching for unique evolutionary fingerprints, or by using a bootstrapping approach which probes diverse conditions. One option for the latter is to generate large ensembles of models, which sample some prior space, to establish a baseline continuum of exo-planet scenarios (C. Fisher & K. Heng 2022). Such an ensemble would then be re-used to bootstrap retrievals of specific exoplanets. Better performance could be de-rived from the evolutionary retrieval by bootstrapping the ABO algorithm with additional initial samples that probe diverse regimes. Our forward-modelling simulates a comprehensive suite of physical and chemical processes, but uses a reduced-complexity configuration of the PROTEUS framework. For example, we use boundary-layer the-ory to parametrise mantle convection, but future stud-ies should adopt radially-resolved planetary interiors through a mixing-length formalism (D. J. Bower et al. 2018; G. Schubert et al. 2001). Compositionally frac-tionating atmospheric escape and orbital evolution might also be considered (M. Herath et al. 2024; M. Attia et al. 2025; E. Bolmont et al. 2013). ‘Compute’ is a limited resource. Here, explore evolu-tionary retrievals’ efficacy with a limited budget of 100 simulations per retrieval. Section 3.4 found that the performance of ABO retrievals saturates at ten parallel workers. The largest value of the objective function f is not attained sooner when more CPU cores are allocated simultaneously. We adopt a fixed 100-simulation budget per retrieval, so this behaviour is expected: our batch worker-dispatch BO algorithm must select query loca-tions without information of PROTEUS outputs from other batch members. Naturally, the larger the batch size, the more information is missing at query selection, leading to eventually diminishing returns of additional workers (E. Contal et al. 2013). Increasing the total 21 compute budget per retrieval may lead to better fit-ting solutions, but sensitivity tests with 200 simulations found negligible improvement. A substantial expansion of the allocated ‘compute’ budget could enable larger numbers of simultaneous workers without compromising the number of batches, yielding improved retrieval per-formance and accuracy. That CPU-scaling performance saturates before ten simultaneous workers are allocated highlights three op-portunities. Firstly, the opportunity for exoplanet re-trievals on population scales, where each PROTEUS re-trieval instance uses few CPU cores, but multiple in-stances are applied in parallel to exoplanets from large surveys. The upcoming Roman Space Telescope is ex-pected to identify 100 000 planets with its wide field im-ager (S. A. Johnson et al. 2020), while PLATO’s nom-inal 4 year lifetime will yield at least 500 Earth-sized planets (F. Matuszewski et al. 2023; H. Rauer et al. 2025). Secondly, the development of multi-planet re-trievals that inform comparative planetology studies. Calculation of our scalar objective f could include ob-servables from multiple planets within a single system (e.g., TRAPPIST-1); the planets’ Class P2 parameters would be jointly retrieved by simulating their evolu-tion with individual PROTEUS simulation (across mul-tiple CPU cores) collected by a single worker process. Thirdly, an opportunity for accessible retrieval scaling to high-performance computing platforms by each individ-ual PROTEUS simulations utilising multiple CPU cores, reduce each simulation’s individual wall-clock runtimes and, correspondingly, reducing the runtime of a com-plete PROTEUS evolutionary retrieval. 4.3. Applicability to real systems 

We present a proof-of-concept test on whether expen-sive multi-physics planetary evolution simulations can enable planetary lifetime retrieval. Section 3.2 demon-strated the feasibility of our approach using three proto-typical planets representative of populations within the current exoplanet census (Figure 2; D. Valencia et al. (2025); L. A. Rogers (2015)). These prototypes have dif-ferent masses and compositions, exposed to contrasting irradiation environments, so our demonstration remains agnostic to the unknown nature of real exoplanets. Future work should leverage PROTEUS evolutionary retrievals against real exoplanet cases by substituting the parameters and observables adopted here (Table 1) with those of real planets, and/or expanding them with different constraints. Our SN prototype can be ap-plied to explain observed divergences between the young sub-Neptunes V 1298 Tauri c/d, TOI-1136 b/c, and TOI-451 b (O. Barrag´ an et al. 2026; C. Beard et al. 2024; M. M. Murphy et al. 2026b,a). Our SE case is ap-plicable for interpreting recent detections of molecular species in the atmospheres of super-Earths L 98-59 c/d, TOI 2076 e, and Kepler-138 c/d (C. Cadieux et al. 2025; M. G. Barber et al. 2025; C. Piaulet et al. 2023; A. Gressier et al. 2024). Detections of young Earth-sized planets remain limited, but our irradiated Terrestrial scenario is analogous to HD 63433 d and Kepler-138 b (B. K. Capistrant et al. 2024; D. Jontof-Hutter et al. 2015). The incorporation of planet age as a constrain-ing quantity on our model may also enable comparative planetology between younger and older systems (C. A. Beichman et al. 2007; J. L. Bean et al. 2017; M. M. Murphy et al. 2026b). It is understood that low-mass exoplanets — particu-larly super-Earths — are strongly shaped by their stel-lar environment through the physics already resolved by PROTEUS (L. A. Rogers 2015; E. Postolec et al. 2026). Simultaneous planet-star parameter retrieval against combined constraints from stellar and planetary observables may provide additional insights or alleviate ongoing parameter degeneracies (V. Rajpaul et al. 2015; B. Klein et al. 2022; A. O. Martinez et al. 2017; A. Meech et al. 2022).  

> 5.

CONCLUSION Intimate insights into planets’ earliest histories and deep interiors remain inaccessible to static forward mod-els within current retrieval frameworks. Yet, a wealth of incoming data from PLATO, JWST, and the ELT de-mand interpretation (H. Rauer et al. 2025; K. D. Gor-don et al. 2022; P. Padovani & M. Cirasuolo 2023). We have tested whether exoplanet lifetimes can be inferred from present-day observations, testing whether parame-ter retrieval with expensive planetary evolution models is feasible, through the modular PROTEUS framework. Our main conclusions are summarised below. 1. We develop a novel machine learning retrieval framework, founded upon Bayesian optimisa-tion, to asynchronously dispatch computationally-expensive models that resolve planetary evolution across billions of years. Our modelling tool (PRO-TEUS) includes the interior-atmosphere physics connecting planet’s initial conditions to their cur-rently observed states. 2. Three representative exoplanet prototypes test the efficacy of evolutionary retrievals: a young sub-Neptune, an older super-Earth, and a warm Ter-restrial. Application of asynchronous Bayesian op-timisation to these scenarios suggests that exo-planets’ mantle redox states and their early post-22 formation sulfur, carbon, and hydrogen inventories can be jointly constrained by current spectroscopic observations. 3. The efficacy of evolutionary retrievals for inter-preting oxidised planets’ observables may miti-gate ongoing observational challenges in reliable measurements of Earth-sized exoplanets’ condi-tions. Oxidised and low-mass regimes are suit-able for precise and accurate characterisation, via physics-determined observable-parameter rela-tionships, given sufficient observations. 4. Comparing observational markers against time-resolved simulations of exoplanets’ atmospheric compositions and structures enables real planets’ current ages — through simulation endpoints — to be leveraged for accurate parameter estimation. 5. Evolutionary retrievals are no panacea; access-ing sub-Neptunes’ internal structures, core frac-tions, and early volatile budgets remains a chal-lenge. The incorporation of additional physics into forward models alleviates degeneracies faced by static-structure approaches, by being lim-ited to realistic, physically permissible thermal-compositional states. 6. Machine learning algorithms best suited for this task adopt a Logarithmic Expected Im-provement acquisition function, without requir-ing penalisation-based or Monte-Carlo techniques. Asynchronous Bayesian optimisation for exoplan-ets’ properties can operate within hours of wall-clock time on fewer than 10 CPU cores. Our demonstration of evolutionary retrievals high-lights the utility of process-complete forward modelling. Incorporation of additional physics into PROTEUS may enable improved and accurate understanding of real ex-oplanets’ past conditions. For example, since efficient retrieval is feasible with few CPU cores, jointly mod-elling secular dynamics of multi-exoplanet systems per-mits comparative planetology and constraining orbital histories (H. Yu et al. 2025; A. M¨ uller et al. 2018; M. Herath et al. 2024). Going forward, leveraging large sim-ulation ensembles to provide the ‘bootstrapping’ initial guesses for retrievals on specific exoplanets may further alleviate parameter degeneracies. Building upon the current interpretive paradigm, re-trievals which adopt simulations of planetary evolution can synergise with the Roman Space Telescope (2026) and the PLATO (2027) mission’s combined survey of planet bulk properties, atmospheric compositions, and age-dating. Pairing these upcoming missions with suffi-cient interpretive tools, resolving the physics that cou-ples planets’ deep interiors with their observable atmo-spheres, will maximise their science return. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS H.N. acknowledges support from STFC grant UKRI1184. H.N. thanks Oliver Shorttle for his guidance during this research, and thanks Karen Stuitje for her comments on this manuscript. V.F. was supported by a Branco Weiss fellowship. T.L. was supported by the Branco Weiss Foundation, the Alfred P. Sloan Founda-tion (AEThER project, G202114194), NASA’s Nexus for Exoplanet System Science research coordination net-work (Alien Earths project, 80NSSC21K0593), and the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation pro-gramme (101219807, MagmaWorlds). R.C. thanks the Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) for the PhD studentship (grant reference ST/Y509139/1). We thank the Center for Information Technology of the University of Groningen for their support and for providing access to the Habrok high performance com-puting cluster. CRediT author statements. HN : Conceptualization, Methodology, Software, Investigation, Data Curation, Writing - Original Draft, Writing - Review & Editing, Visualization. TL : Conceptualization, Resources, Writ-ing - Review & Editing, Project administration, Funding acquisition. BR : Methodology, Software, Writing - Re-view & Editing. RC : Methodology, Software, Writing -Review & Editing. VF : Conceptualization, Supervision, Funding acquisition, Writing - Review & Editing. 

# Software: PROTEUS (H. Nicholls & T. Lichtenberg 2026), AGNI (H. Nicholls 2026), SOCRATES (J. M. Ed-wards 1996; J. Manners 2024), CALLIOPE (P. A. Sossi et al. 2020; H. Nicholls et al. 2024), MORS (C. P. John-stone et al. 2021), NumPy (C. R. Harris et al. 2020), Mat-plotlib (J. D. Hunter 2007), PyTorch (A. Paszke et al. 2019), Python, Julia (J. Bezanson et al. 2017). APPENDIX 23  

> A.

BOUNDARY LAYER MANTLE DYNAMICS MODEL Our boundary-layer mantle dynamics parametrisation (R. Calder et al. In prep.) solves for these planets’ evolving internal potential temperatures Tpot ,43 πc p,m 

 R3int − R3sol 

 dT pot 

dt = 4 πR 2int (Fc − Fl + Fr ), (A1) which are initialised at Tpot (t = 0) = 3200 K to ensure fully-molten initial states. cp,m is the mantle’s specific heat capacity, ρm is the density of the mantle, Robs is the planet radius, Rsol is the radius of the solidification front. Heat fluxes are radially-integrated quantities measured at the surface: mantle convective heat transport Fc, latent heat release from phase change of crystallisation Fl, and radioactive decay Fr . The potential temperature Tpot represents an adiabatic mantle temperature structure referenced against the surface conditions. We incorporate the latent heat released by the phase change of silicate mantle crystallisation, 

Fl = ( Rsol /R int )2∆Hf ρm

dR sol 

dt , (A2) where ∆ Hf = 4 × 10 6 J kg −1 is the MgSiO 3 specific heat of fusion of (L. Schaefer et al. 2016). In parallel, we calculate the radiogenic heat flux Fr assuming that radioisotopes are homogeneously distributed throughout the mantle at Earth-like abundances (K. Lodders & B. Fegley 1998; L. Schaefer & D. Sasselov 2015). The mantle convective heat flux Fc is calculated using a boundary-layer theory parametrisation of Rayleigh-Bernard convection, in the ‘soft turbulence’ regime (T. Lebrun et al. 2013; K. Hamano et al. 2015; L. Schaefer et al. 2016; T. G. Meier et al. 2023; P. J. Tackley 2023). Numerical and empirical experiments have determined that the convective heat flux Fc scales as a function of the Rayleigh number and temperature contrast (G. Schubert 2015), 

Fc = kc

l (Tpot − Tsurf )

 Ra Ra cr 

n

. (A3) The fluid undergoes laminar flow at small Ra ∼ 10 2 and turbulent flow at large Ra ∼ 10 30 . We adopt an exponent 

n = 1 /3 and thermal conductivity kc = 4 .2 W m −1 K−1 from empirical measurements (D. L. Turcotte & G. Schubert 2002). The length-scale l is set equal to the interior (mantle) radius R int . We use a value of 1100 for the critical Rayleigh number (L. Schaefer et al. 2016). The Rayleigh number, Ra, characterises the relative importance of convective energy transport compared to thermal diffusion (D. L. Turcotte & G. Schubert 2002). 

Ra = ρmαg (Tpot − Tsurf ) l3

κη , (A4) where Tpot is the mantle potential temperature, α is the thermal expansibility of the mantle, g is the surface gravity, 

κ is the thermal diffusivity and η is the dynamic viscosity. Following T. Lebrun et al. (2013) and L. Schaefer et al. (2016), we use the Vogel-Fulcher-Tammann relation to analytically represent the mantle’s dynamic viscosity as a function of the potential temperature: 

η = η0

exp[ Ea/(Rgas Tpot )] (1 − (1 − Φv )/(1 − Φcrit  

> v

)) 5/2 , (A5) where the denominator deviates from an Arrhenius-like activation function to adjust for the entrained crystal fraction (M. Ikeda & M. Aniya 2013). The dynamic viscosity is normalised to 3 .8 × 10 9 Pa s in the solid-phase Φ v = 0 end member (L. Schaefer et al. 2016). The mantle’s volume melt fraction is calculated from its potential temperature, Φv = Tpot − Tsol 

Tliq − Tsol 

, (A6) where Tsol = 1420 K and Tliq = 2020 K are the solidus and liquidus temperatures (T. Lebrun et al. 2013). 24 We assume that the magma ocean undergoes fractional bottom-up monotonic solidification (V. S. Solomatov & D. J. Stevenson 1993; D. J. Bower et al. 2019; M. Maurice et al. 2017; J. Monteux et al. 2016), which allows expressing the solidification front’s radius as a function of the volumetric melt fraction, 

R3sol = R3int − Φv · (R3int − R3core ), (A7) and an analytic expression for its time derivative, 

dR sol 

dt = − R3int − R3core 

3R2sol (Tliq − Tsol )

dT pot 

dt . (A8) The surface temperature Tsurf evolves subject to balance between the energy transported through the atmosphere (Fatm , calculated by AGNI) and the energy arising from the planet’s interior, 



cp, atm Matm + cp,m 

43 πρ m



R3int − (Rint − δ)3 dT surf 

dt =4πR 2int (Fc − Fatm ) ,

(A9) where cp, atm is specific heat capacity of the atmosphere, Matm is the mass of the atmosphere (calculated by PROTEUS’ outgassing module, CALLIOPE), δ is the thickness of the surface conductive boundary layer and is the net flux from the atmosphere (calculated by PROTEUS’ atmosphere module, AGNI). The thickness of the thin solidified boundary layer at the surface is set by conduction, 

δ = k (Tpot − Tsurf ) /F c (A10) Core radius fractions rc = Rcore /R int are held constant in time — although they are varied between the explored planet scenarios — and solve for their average core densities using analytical scaling relationships (L. Noack & M. Lasbleis 2020). The core material’s specific heat capacity is held constant at 880 J kg −1 K−1 (K. Lodders & B. Fegley 1998; D. J. Bower et al. 2018). 

B. ASYNCHRONOUS BAYESIAN OPTIMISATION ALGORITHM Here, we formally describe the algorithmic procedure by which PROTEUS implements batched asynchronous Bayesian optimisation (ABO). Algorithm 1 uses q workers, each allocated a single CPU core, which each supports one PROTEUS simulation (Section 2.1) to perform a query (a forward model) in parameter space. 

Algorithm 1: Asynchronous BO with q workers, implemented within the PROTEUS framework. 

Require: Oracle f (·), acquisition function α(·), globally stored initial data D0 = {(xi, y i)}n0

> i=1

, query budget N 

> 1:

initialise: B ← { xj }qj=1 quasi-random  

> 2:

spawn: q worker processes  

> 3:

for xj ∈ B do  

> 4:

start worker j with query f (xj ) 

> 5:

end for  

> 6:

set: n ← 0 

> 7:

while n < N do  

> 8:

if worker j completes query ( xn+1 , y n+1 ) then  

> 9:

Dn+1 ← Dn ∪ { (xn+1 , y n+1 )} 

> 10:

B ← B \ { xn+1 } 

> 11:

GP j ← fit-surrogate( GP j , Dn+1 ) 

> 12:

x′ ← arg max  

> x∈X

α(x | Dn+1 ) 

> 13:

B ← B ∪ { x′} 

> 14:

start worker j with query f (x′) 

> 15:

n ← n + 1  

> 16:

end if  

> 17:

end while  

> 18:

return i∗ = arg max i yi and ( xi∗ , y i∗ )25 1500                 

> 2000
> 2500
> 3000
> 3500
> Tsurf  [K]
> Sub-Neptune
> (a)
> 10 510 610 710 810 9
> Simulated planet age [yr]
> 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Partial pressure [bar]
> (b) Super-Earth
> (c)
> 10 510 610 710 810 9
> Simulated planet age [yr]
> (d) Terrestrial
> (e)
> 10 510 610 710 810 9
> Simulated planet age [yr]
> H2O
> CO 2
> H2S
> CO
> H2
> SO 2
> CH 4
> (f)
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> 5
> Total gas loss [M  \%]
> Figure 7. Thermal and compositional evolution of ground-truth scenarios: Sub-Neptune ( left ), Super-Earth ( middle ), and Terrestrial ( right ). Top : surface temperature (solid) and the time-integrated amount of gas lost (dashed) as the planets evolve from their initial state (x-axis). Bottom : partial surface pressures of major gas species (line colours), on the same time-axis as top panels. C.

THERMAL AND COMPOSITIONAL EVOLUTION OF GROUND-TRUTH SCENARIOS Prototype exoplanet cases simulated with PROTEUS (Section 2.1) establish the ground-truth observables against which we test the efficacy of retrieving exoplanets’ parameters using PROTEUS. Figure 7 shows the thermal (top) and compositional (bottom) evolution of our three prototypes (columns). These planets differ by their Class P1 and P2 input parameters, which yield their different Class O1 and O2 observables (Table 1). All three scenarios cool from an initially hot state, in which their mantles are fully molten. Their surface temperatures exceed 3000 K at this point (Figure 7 top panels, solid lines). All rocky planets are expected to begin with primordial magma oceans, through the energy obtained during their accretion (L. T. Elkins-Tanton 2012; A. N. Halliday & R. M. Canup 2023), formation (H. E. Schlichting 2018; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2023), and metallic core segregation (J. Wade & B. J. Wood 2005; S.-i. Karato & V. Rama Murthy 1997). The surface temperatures Tsurf decrease monotonically as the planets thermally radiate energy to space. Emission from their surfaces is modulated by atmospheric blanketing, since their surface pressures ( > 100 bar) generate optically-thick radiation streams (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; Y. Abe & T. Matsui 1986). The atmospheric temperature structures and gas opacities also induce a strong greenhouse effect (J. F. Kasting 1988; R. Pierrehumbert & E. Gaidos 2011; K. Hamano et al. 2013; R. K. Kopparapu et al. 2013). Outgoing thermal emission is offset by incoming stellar radiation (C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021; F. Spada et al. 2013), which is modulated by an upward radiation stream from Rayleigh scattering (R. T. Pierrehumbert 2010). The modelled atmospheric partial pressures evolve due to multiple simultaneously-acting processes. The bottom row of Figure 7 plots the volume mixing ratios of near-surface gas phase, for each case (columns). These evolve through the gradual stripping of CHNS elements by hydrodynamic escape, temperature dependent shifts in thermochemical speciation, and repartitioning between the atmosphere and magma ocean.  

> D.

BEST-FITTING ESTIMATES OF PARAMETER AND OBSERVABLE QUANTITIES Our asynchronous Bayesian optimisation algorithm is configured to perform 100 PROTEUS simulations per retrieval, to estimate the best-fitting values of our Class P2 parameters, given some constraining Class O1 observables. Each PROTEUS simulation also calculates a large number of Class O2 output quantities — from which we highlight the atmospheric H 2O volume mixing ratio, surface temperature, and surface pressure. These values underpin the results presented in Sections 3.2 and 3.3. This appendix section quantifies the parameters, observables, and several of the output quantities corresponding to the best-fitting scenarios explored by PROTEUS’ ABO retrieval algorithm. Table 3 presents the best-fitting scenarios’ estimated Class P2 parameters, constraining Class O1 observables, and output quantities. Errors are quantified linearly against the synthetic ground-truth (Table 1) — we emphasise that several quantities are physically expected to vary across multiple orders of magnitude, although errors are quantified on a linear scale. 26 

(P2) Estimated parameter Sub-Neptune Super-Earth Terrestrial Expected scaling behaviour Metallic core frac. [% radius] 46.9 (25.4%) 30.0 (25.0%) 63.0 (12.7%) Linear 

f O2 [∆IW] -1.44 (52.0%) +1.19 (58.1%) +4.00 (25.0%) Linear Initial H ppmw 2950 (70.5%) 1700 (83.0%) 1570 (21.3%) Logarithmic Initial C/H 1.60 (68.8%) 1.30 (13.7%) 2.72 (8.2%) Logarithmic Initial S/H 0.86 (6.7%) 3.17 (37.0%) 1.01 (21.2%) Logarithmic 

(O1) Constraining observable Sub-Neptune Super-Earth Terrestrial Expected scaling behaviour Photosphere radius [ R⊕] 1.52 (21.1%) 1.34 (8.3%) 1.03 (4.8%) Logarithmic Photosphere temp. [K] 314 (0.2%) 365 (10.7%) 576 (1.1%) Linear Photosphere gravity [m/s 2] 1.29 (37.3%) 1.05 (13.6%) 9.44 (9.1%) Logarithmic Atmosphere molec. weight [g/mol] 10.3 (60.4%) 18.0 (4.8%) 25.9 (0.6%) Linear Atmosphere C/O (wt.) 5.21 (38.7%) 0.02 (97.1%) 0.17 (11.1%) Logarithmic Atmosphere S/O (wt.) 1.00 (5.9%) 0.61 (6.7%) 0.10 (14.8%) Logarithmic Atmosphere O/H (wt.) 0.35 (54.1%) 4.95 (43.4%) 13.20 (1.2%) Logarithmic 

(O2) Extra output quantity Sub-Neptune Super-Earth Terrestrial Expected scaling behaviour H2O volume mix. ratio [%] 6.3 (64.3%) 58.4 (59.1%) 65.9 (7.6%) Logarithmic 

Psurf [kbar] 1.20 (46.2%) 1.95 (95.5%) 4.82 (41.4%) Logarithmic 

Tsurf [K] 1630 (9.5%) 1350 (29.6%) 1380 (11.4%) Linear 

Table 3. Best-fitting parameters, observables, and additional output variables estimated by PROTEUS’ ABO retrievals for our three prototype exoplanet cases. Physics dictates that some variables scale across logarithmically, across multiple orders of magnitude, while others will exhibit linear behaviours. We quantify the relative misfit ‘error’ compared to the ground-truth (Table 1) in parentheses: ϵ = |(o − t)/t |.E. FORWARD-MODEL COMPUTATIONAL EXPENSE Our machine learning retrieval mode (within the PROTEUS framework) enables the application of a computationally expensive simulations (forward models) through asynchronous Bayesian optimisation (B. Riegler et al. 2026). The runtime of each PROTEUS simulation is variable. We adopt an adaptive time-stepping scheme to run simulations up to a targeted integration time, but simulations may terminate before this point (Section 2.1) and numerical performance depends on the ‘stiffness’ of the scenario modelled (R. S. Stepleman 1983; W. H. Press 2007; J. Bezanson et al. 2017). Each PROTEUS simulation was run on a single CPU thread, but multiple workers and retrieval instances enable parallelisation. We used a Intel Xeon E5-2650 v4 CPU with 48 cores that have a maximum frequency of 2.9 GHz. Figure 8 plots histograms of PROTEUS wall-clock runtimes seen during our baseline retrievals of the Sub-Neptune, Super-Earth, and Terrestrial scenarios (histogram colour; Section 3.2). PROTEUS wall-clock runtimes range from 2 to 8 minutes, but depend strongly on the targeted physical regime. The TR simulations typically had the shortest wall-clock runtime ( ∼ 3 minutes), consistent with it having the shortest integration time. The SE simulations (orange) had the longest maximum integration time, but their wall-clock runtimes are generally shorter than the SN case (blue). Simulations within the sub-Neptune regime are computationally more expensive, because radiative-convective solutions for their H 2-dominated atmospheres require more iterations to converge (H. Nicholls et al. 2025b). The incorporation of additional physics into the forward-model simulations would increase these wall-clock runtimes. For example, by using the SPIDER interior geodynamics model rather than a boundary-layer parametrisation, which would provide enhanced model accuracy in the mixed-phase magma ocean regime (D. J. Bower et al. 2019; Y. Abe 1993). REFERENCES 

Abe, Y. 1993, Thermal Evolution and Chemical Differentiation of the Terrestrial Magma Ocean (American Geophysical Union (AGU)), 41–54, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/GM074p0041 Abe, Y., & Matsui, T. 1986, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 91, E291, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/JB091iB13p0E291 Aerts, C. 2021, Rev. Mod. Phys., 93, 015001, doi: 10.1103/RevModPhys.93.015001 27 2 3 4 5 6 7 8

> Binned PROTEUS simulation runtimes [minutes]
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> Simulations per bin  Sub-Neptune
> Super-Earth
> Terrestrial
> 3.0 +0.4 0.1
> 4.2 +0.6 0.3
> 4.8 +1.1 0.9

Figure 8. Histograms of PROTEUS simulation wall-clock runtimes (minutes), corresponding to the baseline asynchronous BO retrievals presented in Figures 3 and 4. Median values are shown by dashed vertical lines; annotations include median and ±1standard deviation ranges. Histogram colours denote the exoplanet case being modelled. A total of 100 simulations were run for each retrieval. Aigrain, S., & Foreman-Mackey, D. 2023, ARA&A, 329, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-052920-103508 Al-Refaie, A. F., Changeat, Q., Venot, O., Waldmann, I. P., & Tinetti, G. 2022, Astrophys. J., 932, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6dcd Ament, S., Daulton, S., Eriksson, D., Balandat, M., & Bakshy, E. 2023, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 36, 20577. https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2023/hash/ 419f72cbd568ad62183f8132a3605a2a-Abstract-Conference.html Amundsen, D. S., Tremblin, P., Manners, J., Baraffe, I., & Mayne, N. J. 2017, Astron. Astrophys., 598, A97, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629322 Ardia, P., Hirschmann, M. M., Withers, A. C., & Stanley, B. D. 2013, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 114, 52, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2013.03.028 Armstrong, L. S., Hirschmann, M. M., Stanley, B. D., Falksen, E. G., & Jacobsen, S. D. 2015, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 171, 283, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2015.07.007 Arora, R., Ranjan, S., Moitra, P., & Mallik, A. 2026, Planet. Sci. J., 7, 84, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ae53e3 Attia, M., Bourrier, V., Bolmont, E., et al. 2025, Astron. Astrophys., 702, A132, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202555239 Baraffe, I., Homeier, D., Allard, F., & Chabrier, G. 2015, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 577, A42, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201425481 Barber, M. G., Mann, A. W., Vanderburg, A., Boyle, A. W., & Lopez Murillo, A. I. 2025, AJ, 170, 32, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/add7db Barker, M., Chue Hong, N. P., Katz, D. S., et al. 2022, Sci. Data, 9, 622, doi: 10.1038/s41597-022-01710-x Barrag´ an, O., Mallorqu´ ın, M., Fern´ andez-Fern´ andez, J., et al. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag087 Barstow, J. K. 2020, MNRAS, 497, 4183, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2219 Barstow, J. K., Aigrain, S., Irwin, P. G. J., Kendrew, S., & Fletcher, L. N. 2015, MNRAS, 448, 2546, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv186 Barstow, J. K., & Heng, K. 2020, Space Science Reviews, 216, doi: 10.1007/s11214-020-00666-x Bean, J. L., Abbot, D. S., & Kempton, E. M.-R. 2017, Astrophys. J. Lett., 841, L24, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa738a Beard, C., Robertson, P., Dai, F., et al. 2024, Astron. J., 167, 70, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad1330 Behr, P. R., France, K., Brown, A., et al. 2023, AJ, 166, 35, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acdb70 Beichman, C. A., Fridlund, M., Traub, W. A., et al. 2007, Protostars and Planets V, 915, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0601469 Benneke, B., Roy, P.-A., Coulombe, L.-P., et al. 2024, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2403.03325, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2403.03325 Bergermann, A., French, M., & Redmer, R. 2024, Phys. Rev. B, 109, 174107, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevB.109.174107 Bergin, E. A., Hirschmann, M. M., & Izidoro, A. 2026, Annual Reviews, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-043024-121518 Bergin, E. A., Kempton, E. M.-R., Hirschmann, M., et al. 2023, Astrophys. J. Lett., 949, L17, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acd377 Bezanson, J., Edelman, A., Karpinski, S., & Shah, V. B. 2017, SIAM Review, 59, 65, doi: 10.1137/141000671 Birkby, J. L. 2018, in Handbook of Exoplanets (Cham, Switzerland: Springer International Publishing), 1–24, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-30648-3 16-1 Bitsch, B., Raymond, S. N., & Izidoro, A. 2019, Astron. Astrophys., 624, A109, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935007 28 

Bloot, S., Miguel, Y., Bazot, M., & Howard, S. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 6282, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1873 Boer, I. D., Nicholls, H., & Lichtenberg, T. 2025, Astrophys. J., 987, 172, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/add69f Boitard-Crepeau, L., Ceccarelli, C., Beck, P., Vacher, L., & Ugliengo, P. 2025, Astrophys. J. Lett., 987, L25, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ade5aa Boley, K. M., Panero, W. R., Unterborn, C. T., et al. 2023, Astrophys. J., 954, 202, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acea85 Bolmont, E., Selsis, F., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2013, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 556, A17, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201220837 Bond, J. C., O’Brien, D. P., & Lauretta, D. S. 2010, Astrophys. J., 715, 1050, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/715/2/1050 Boulliung, J., & Wood, B. J. 2022, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 336, 150, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2022.08.032 Bower, D. J., Hakim, K., Sossi, P. A., & Sanan, P. 2022, The Planetary Science Journal, 3, 93, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac5fb1 Bower, D. J., Kitzmann, D., Wolf, A. S., et al. 2019, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 631, A103, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935710 Bower, D. J., Sanan, P., & Wolf, A. S. 2018, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 274, 49, doi: 10.1016/j.pepi.2017.11.004 Bower, D. J., Thompson, M. A., Hakim, K., Tian, M., & Sossi, P. A. 2025, Astrophys. J., 995, 59, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae1479 Burn, R., Mordasini, C., Mishra, L., et al. 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 463, doi: 10.1038/s41550-023-02183-7 Cadieux, C., L’Heureux, A., Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2507.09343, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.09343 Calder, R., Shorttle, O., Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., & Guimond, C. M. 2026, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 549, stag1007, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag1007 Calder, R., Shorttle, O., Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., & Guimond, C.-M. In prep., Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. Capistrant, B. K., Soares-Furtado, M., Vanderburg, A., et al. 2024, AJ, 167, 54, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad1039 Carter, A. L., Hinkley, S., Kammerer, J., et al. 2023, Astrophys. J. Lett., 951, L20, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acd93e Cesario, L., Lichtenberg, T., Attia, M., et al. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.13793 Charlier, B., & Namur, O. 2019, Elements, 15, 9, doi: 10.2138/gselements.15.1.9 Chase, M. W. 1986, JANAF thermochemical tables (New York: American Chemical Society). https://janaf.nist.gov/ Cherubim, C., Wordsworth, R., Bower, D. J., et al. 2025, Astrophys. J., 983, 97, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adbca9 Childs, A. C., Shakespeare, C., Rice, D. R., Yang, C.-C., & Steffen, J. H. 2023, Composition constraints of the TRAPPIST-1 planets from their formation, arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.04989 Chyba, C. F. 1990, Nature, 343, 129, doi: 10.1038/343129a0 Clark, W. C. 1982 (New York: Oxford University Press), 469 Cmiel, J., Wordsworth, R., & Seeley, J. T. 2025, The Planetary Science Journal, 6, 123, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/adcd5f Contal, E., Buffoni, D., Robicquet, A., & Vayatis, N. 2013, in Joint European Conference on Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, Springer, 225–240 Cottrell, E., Canil, D., Langmuir, C., Evans, K. A., & Gaillard, F. 2025, Nat. Rev. Earth Environ., 6, 728, doi: 10.1038/s43017-025-00735-1 Cronin, T. W. 2014, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 71, 2994, doi: 10.1175/JAS-D-13-0392.1 Dai, F., Petigura, E., Livingston, J., et al. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.00974 Dasgupta, R., Falksen, E., Pal, A., & Sun, C. 2022, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 336, 291, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2022.09.012 Davey, J. J., Yip, K. H., Changeat, Q., & Waldmann, I. P. 2025, RAS Techniques and Instruments, 4, rzaf052, doi: 10.1093/rasti/rzaf052 David, T. J., Contardo, G., Sandoval, A., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 265, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abf439 De Ath, G., Everson, R. M., & Fieldsend, J. E. 2021, in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, PMLR, 578–588 Demangeon, O. D. S., Zapatero Osorio, M. R., Alibert, Y., et al. 2021, A&A, 653, A41, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202140728 Dixon, J. E. 1997, American Mineralogist, 82, 368 Dorn, C., Khan, A., Heng, K., et al. 2015, Astron. Astrophys., 577, A83, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424915 Dorn, C., & Lichtenberg, T. 2021, ApJL, 922, L4, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac33af Dreibus, G., & Palme, H. 1996, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 60, 1125, doi: 10.1016/0016-7037(96)00028-2 Edwards, J. M. 1996, J. Atmos. Sci., 53, 1921, doi: 10.1175/1520-0469(1996)053 ⟨1921:ECOIFA ⟩2.0.CO;2 Edwards, J. M., & Slingo, A. 1996, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 122, 689, doi: 10.1002/qj.49712253107 29 

Elkins-Tanton, L. 2008, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 271, 181, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2008.03.062 Elkins-Tanton, L. T. 2012, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 40, 113, doi: https: //doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-042711-105503 Fairman, C., Wakeford, H. R., & MacDonald, R. J. 2024, Astron. J., 167, 240, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad3454 Fischer, R. A., Campbell, A. J., Shofner, G. A., et al. 2011, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 304, 496, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2011.02.025 Fisher, C., & Heng, K. 2022, Astrophys. J., 934, 31, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7801 Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., & Goodman, J. 2013, Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac., 125, 306, doi: 10.1086/670067 Fortney, J. J. 2005, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 364, 649, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2005.09587.x Fortney, J. J., Lodders, K., Marley, M. S., & Freedman, R. S. 2008, ApJ, 678, 1419, doi: 10.1086/528370 Fowler, W. A., & Hoyle, F. 1960, Ann. Phys., 10, 280, doi: 10.1016/0003-4916(60)90025-7 Franco, P., Roig, F., Winter, O. C., et al. 2025, Nat. Astron., 9, 1158, doi: 10.1038/s41550-025-02582-y Frost, B. R. 1991, INTRODUCTION TO OXYGEN FUGACITY AND ITS PETROLOGIC IMPORTANCE, ed. D. H. Lindsley (Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter), 1–10, doi: doi:10.1515/9781501508684-004 Frost, D. J., & McCammon, C. A. 2008, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 36, 389, doi: 10.1146/annurev.earth.36.031207.124322 Fulton, B. J., Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 109, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa80eb Gaillard, F., Bouhifd, M. A., Furi, E., et al. 2021, Space Science Reviews, 217, 22, doi: 10.1007/s11214-021-00802-1 Gaillard, F., Bernadou, F., Roskosz, M., et al. 2022, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 577, 117255, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2021.117255 Garnett, R. 2023, Bayesian optimization (Cambridge University Press) Garvin, E. O., Bonse, M. J., Hayoz, J., et al. 2024, Astron. Astrophys., 689, A143, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202449149 Gilks, W. R. 1996, Markov chain Monte Carlo in practice (London: Chapman & Hall) Ginsbourger, D., Le Riche, R., & Carraro, L. 2010, in Computational intelligence in expensive optimization problems (Springer), 131–162 Ginzburg, S., Schlichting, H. E., & Sari, R. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 825, 29, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/825/1/29 Ginzburg, S., Schlichting, H. E., & Sari, R. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 759, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty290 Goodman, J., & Weare, J. 2010, Communications in Applied Mathematics and Computational Science, 5, 65, doi: 10.2140/camcos.2010.5.65 Gordon, K. D., Bohlin, R., Sloan, G. C., et al. 2022, AJ, 163, 267, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac66dc Gressier, A., Espinoza, N., Allen, N. H., et al. 2024, ApJL, 975, L10, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad73d1 Grimm, S. L., Malik, M., Kitzmann, D., et al. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 253, 30, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/abd773 Halliday, A. N., & Canup, R. M. 2023, Nature Reviews Earth & Environment, 4, 19, doi: 10.1038/s43017-022-00370-0 Hamano, K., Abe, Y., & Genda, H. 2013, Nature, 497, 607, doi: 10.1038/nature12163 Hamano, K., Kawahara, H., Abe, Y., Onishi, M., & Hashimoto, G. L. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 806, 216, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/806/2/216 Hammond, M., & Pierrehumbert, R. T. 2017, Astrophys. J., 849, 152, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa9328 Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., Walt, S. J. v. d., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2 Hayes, J. J. C., Kerins, E., Awiphan, S., et al. 2020, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 494, 4492, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa978 Heng, K., Owen, J. E., & Tian, M. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2504.02499, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2504.02499 Herath, M., Boukare, C.-e., & Cowan, N. B. 2024, MNRAS, 535, 2404, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2431 Hirschmann, M. M. 2012, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 341, 48, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2012.06.015 Hirschmann, M. M. 2021, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 313, 74, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2021.08.039 Ho, C. S. K., Rogers, J. G., Eylen, V. v., Owen, J. E., & Schlichting, H. E. 2024, MNRAS, 531, 3698, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae1376 Ho, C. S. K., & Van Eylen, V. 2023, MNRAS, 519, 4056, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3802 Howard, S., Helled, R., Bergermann, A., & Redmer, R. 2025, Astron. Astrophys., 703, A154, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202556322 Huang, C., Rice, D. R., & Steffen, J. H. 2022, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 513, 5256, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1133 30 

Hunten, D. M., Pepin, R. O., & Walker, J. C. 1987, Icarus, 69, 532, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(87)90022-4 Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90, doi: 10.1109/mcse.2007.55 Hvarfner, C., Hellsten, E. O., & Nardi, L. 2024, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2402.02229 Ikeda, M., & Aniya, M. 2013, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 371-372, 53, doi: 10.1016/j.jnoncrysol.2013.04.034 Ito, Y., & Changeat, Q. 2026, Astrophys. J., 1006, 37, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae6917 Ito, Y., & Ikoma, M. 2021, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 502, 750, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa3962 Ito, Y., Ikoma, M., Kawahara, H., et al. 2015, Astrophys. J., 801, 144, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/801/2/144 Jendreieck, A., Pacheco, E. J., de Andrade, L. B., & Su´ arez, J. C. 2010, Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union, 6, 509 Johnson, S. A., Penny, M., Gaudi, B. S., et al. 2020, Astron. J., 160, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aba75b Johnstone, C. P., Bartel, M., & Gudel, M. 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 649, A96, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038407 Jones, D. R., Schonlau, M., & Welch, W. J. 1998, J. Global Optim., 13, 455, doi: 10.1023/A:1008306431147 Jontof-Hutter, D., Rowe, J. F., Lissauer, J. J., Fabrycky, D. C., & Ford, E. B. 2015, Nature, 522, 321, doi: 10.1038/nature14494 Jordan, S., Tsai, S.-M., Rimmer, P. B., & Shorttle, O. 2026, Astrophys. J. Lett., 1003, L22, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae6864 Jørgensen, B. R., & Lindegren, L. 2005, Astron. Astrophys., 436, 127, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20042185 Joyce, M., & Tayar, J. 2023, Galaxies, 11, 75, doi: 10.3390/galaxies11030075 Karato, S.-i., & Rama Murthy, V. 1997, Phys. Earth Planet. Inter., 100, 61, doi: 10.1016/S0031-9201(96)03232-3 Kasting, J. F. 1988, Icarus, 74, 472, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(88)90116-9 Kasting, J. F., Eggler, D. H., & Raeburn, S. P. 1993, The Journal of geology, 101, 245 Katyal, N., Ortenzi, G., Lee Grenfell, J., et al. 2020, A&A, 643, A81, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038779 Kimura, T., & Ikoma, M. 2020, MNRAS, 496, 3755, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1778 Kimura, T., & Lichtenberg, T. 2026, Astrophys. J., 1000, 220, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae4d3e Kippenhahn, R., Weigert, A., & Weiss, A. 2012, Stellar Structure and Evolution (Berlin, Germany: Springer). https://link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-3-642-30304-3 Kite, E. S., Fegley Jr., B., Schaefer, L., & Ford, E. B. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal, 891, 111, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab6ffb Kitzmann, D., Stock, J. W., & Patzer, A. B. C. 2024, MNRAS, 527, 7263, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3515 Klein, B., Zicher, N., Kavanagh, R. D., et al. 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 512, Issue 4, pp.5067-5084, 512, 5067, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac761 Kopparapu, R. K., Ramirez, R., Kasting, J. F., et al. 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 765, 131, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/765/2/131 Kreidberg, L., Koll, D. D. B., Morley, C., et al. 2019, Nature, 573, 87, doi: 10.1038/s41586-019-1497-4 Kress, V. C., & Carmichael, I. S. E. 1991, Contrib. Mineral. Petrol., 108, 82, doi: 10.1007/BF00307328 Krijt, S., Kama, M., McClure, M., et al. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 1031, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.10056 Krissansen-Totton, J. 2023, ApJL, 951, L39, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acdc26 Krissansen-Totton, J., & Fortney, J. J. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 933, 115, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac69cb Krissansen-Totton, J., Wogan, N., Thompson, M., & Fortney, J. J. 2024, Nature Communications, 15, 8374, doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-52642-6 Lacis, A. A., & Oinas, V. 1991, Journal of Geophysical Research, 96, 9027, doi: 10.1029/90jd01945 Lebrun, T., Massol, H., Chassefiere, E., et al. 2013, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 118, 1155, doi: 10.1002/jgre.20068 Li, J., Bergin, E. A., Hirschmann, M. M., et al. 2025, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2508.16781 Lichtenberg, T. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 914, L4, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac0146 Lichtenberg, T., Bower, D. J., Hammond, M., et al. 2021, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 126, doi: 10.1029/2020JE006711 Lichtenberg, T., Golabek, G. J., Burn, R., et al. 2019, Nat. Astron., 3, 307, doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0688-5 Lichtenberg, T., Schaefer, L., Krissansen-Totton, J., et al. 2026a, Planet. Sci. J., 7, 108, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ae593b 31 

Lichtenberg, T., Schaefer, L. K., Nakajima, M., & Fischer, R. A. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 907, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.10023 Lichtenberg, T., Shorttle, O., Teske, J., & Kempton, E. M.-R. 2025, Science, 390, doi: 10.1126/science.ads3360 Lichtenberg, T., Nicholls, H., Soucasse, L., et al. 2026b, In review at JOSS. https://joss.theoj.org/papers/ 5ad0fcd0923abe07bfd557d4b2271201 Lock, S. J., Stewart, S. T., Petaev, M. I., et al. 2018, J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 123, 910, doi: 10.1002/2017JE005333 Lodders, K., & Fegley, B. 1998, The planetary scientist’s companion / Katharina Lodders, Bruce Fegley. Lopez, E. D. 2017, MNRAS, 472, 245, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1558 Lopez, E. D., & Fortney, J. J. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal, 792, 1, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/1 Lopez, E. D., Fortney, J. J., & Miller, N. 2012, Astrophys. J., 761, 59, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/761/1/59 Luger, R., & Barnes, R. 2015, Astrobiology, 15, 119, doi: 10.1089/ast.2014.1231 Luque, R., & Palle, E. 2022, Science, 377, 1211, doi: 10.1126/science.abl7164 Luu, C. N., Yu, X., Glein, C. R., et al. 2024, Astrophys. J. Lett., 977, L51, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad9eb1 MacDonald, R. J., & Batalha, N. E. 2023, Res. Notes AAS, 7, 54, doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/acc46a MacDonald, R. J., Goyal, J. M., & Lewis, N. K. 2020, Astrophys. J. Lett., 893, L43, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab8238 MacDonald, R. J., & Lewis, N. K. 2022, Astrophys. J., 929, 20, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac47fe Madhusudhan, N. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 758, 36, doi: 10.1088/0004-637x/758/1/36 Madhusudhan, N. 2019, ARA&A, 57, 617, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081817-051846 Madhusudhan, N., Agundez, M., Moses, J. I., & Hu, Y. 2016, Space Science Reviews, 205, 285, doi: 10.1007/s11214-016-0254-3 Madhusudhan, N., Moses, J. I., Rigby, F., & Barrier, E. 2023a, Faraday Discussions, 245, 80, doi: 10.1039/D3FD00075C Madhusudhan, N., Sarkar, S., Constantinou, S., et al. 2023b, ApJL, 956, L13, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acf577 Madhusudhan, N., & Seager, S. 2009, Astrophys. J., 707, 24, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/707/1/24 Manners, J. 2024, AIP Conference Proceedings, 2988, 030002, doi: 10.1063/5.0185476 Marley, M., & Robinson, T. 2015, ARA&A, 53, 279, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082214-122522 Martinez, A. O., Crossfield, I. J. M., Schlieder, J. E., et al. 2017, Astrophys. J., 837, 72, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa56c7 Matuszewski, F., Nettelmann, N., Cabrera, J., B¨ orner, A., & Rauer, H. 2023, Astron. Astrophys., 677, A133, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245287 Maurice, M., Dasgupta, R., & Hassanzadeh, P. 2023, The Planetary Science Journal, 4, 31, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/acb2ca Maurice, M., Tosi, N., Samuel, H., et al. 2017, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 122, 577, doi: 10.1002/2016JE005250 Meech, A., Aigrain, S., Brogi, M., & Birkby, J. L. 2022, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 512, 2604, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac662 Meier, T. G., Bower, D. J., Lichtenberg, T., Hammond, M., & Tackley, P. J. 2023, A&A, 678, A29, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346950 Moˇ ckus, J. 2005, in Optimization Techniques IFIP Technical Conference Novosibirsk, July 1–7, 1974 (Berlin, Germany: Springer), 400–404, doi: 10.1007/3-540-07165-2 55 Molliere, P., Wardenier, J. P., van Boekel, R., et al. 2019, Astron. Astrophys., 627, A67, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935470 Molliere, P., Molyarova, T., Bitsch, B., et al. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 934, 74, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac6a56 Monteux, J., Andrault, D., & Samuel, H. 2016, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 448, 140, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2016.05.010 Moran, S. E., Stevenson, K. B., Sing, D. K., et al. 2023, High Tide or Riptide on the Cosmic Shoreline? A Water-Rich Atmosphere or Stellar Contamination for the Warm Super-Earth GJ˜486b from JWST Observations, arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2305.00868 M¨ uller, A., Keppler, M., Henning, T., et al. 2018, A&A, 617, L2, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833584 Murphy, M. M., Feinstein, A. D., Schochet, M. E., et al. 2026a, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.16782 Murphy, M. M., Nixon, M. C., Feinstein, A. D., et al. 2026b, Astron. J., 172, 66, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae7a32 Namur, O., Charlier, B., Holtz, F., Cartier, C., & McCammon, C. 2016, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 448, 102, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2016.05.024 Nicholls, H. 2026, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.21393188 32 

Nicholls, H., Guimond, C. M., Hay, H. C. F. C., et al. 2025a, MNRAS, 541, 2566, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1167 Nicholls, H., Hebrard, E., Venot, O., Drummond, B., & Evans, E. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 5681, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1734 Nicholls, H., Krissansen-Totton, J., Lichtenberg, T., et al. 2026a, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.24757 Nicholls, H., & Lichtenberg, T. 2026, Zenodo, doi: 10.5281/zenodo.21530047 Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., Bower, D. J., & Pierrehumbert, R. 2024, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 129, e2024JE008576, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JE008576 Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., Chatterjee, R., et al. 2026b, Nature Astronomy Nicholls, H., Pierrehumbert, R., & Lichtenberg, T. 2025b, Journal of Open Source Software, 10, 7726, doi: 10.21105/joss.07726 Nicholls, H., Pierrehumbert, R. T., Lichtenberg, T., Soucasse, L., & Smeets, S. 2025c, MNRAS, 536, 2957, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2772 Nicholls, H., Shorttle, O., Lichtenberg, T., & Pascal, F. 2026c, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.15891 Nicklas, R. W., Puchtel, I. S., & Ash, R. D. 2018, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 222, 447, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2017.11.002 Noack, L., & Lasbleis, M. 2020, Astron. Astrophys., 638, A129, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037723 Norris, C. A., & Wood, B. J. 2017, Nature, 549, 507, doi: 10.1038/nature23645 Noti, P. A., & Lee, E. K. H. 2024, Astron. Astrophys., 691, A139, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202451823 O’Neill, H. St. C., & Eggins, S. M. 2002, Chem. Geol., 186, 151, doi: 10.1016/S0009-2541(01)00414-4 Owen, J. E. 2019, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 47, 67, doi: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-earth-053018-060246 Owen, J. E., & Morton, Timothy. D. 2016, Astrophys. J. Lett., 819, L10, doi: 10.3847/2041-8205/819/1/L10 Owen, J. E., & Wu, Y. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 847, 29, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa890a Padovani, P., & Cirasuolo, M. 2023, Contemporary Physics, 64, 47, doi: 10.1080/00107514.2023.2266921 Pagliaro, L., Zingales, T., Piotto, G., Giovannini, I., & Mantovan, G. 2026, Astron. Astrophys., 709, A17, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202558264 Panagiotou, I., Lichtenberg, T., Tsai, S.-M., & Nicholls, H. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.15204 Parmentier, V., Line, M. R., Bean, J. L., et al. 2018, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 617, A110, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833059 Paszke, A., Gross, S., Massa, F., et al. 2019, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1912.01703 Paxton, B., Bildsten, L., Dotter, A., et al. 2011, ApJS, 192, 3, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/192/1/3 Peslier, A. H., Schonbachler, M., Busemann, H., & Karato, S.-I. 2017, Space Sci. Rev., 212, 743, doi: 10.1007/s11214-017-0387-z Piaulet, C., Benneke, B., Almenara, J. M., et al. 2023, Nat. Astron., 7, 206, doi: 10.1038/s41550-022-01835-4 Pierrehumbert, R., & Gaidos, E. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 734, L13, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/734/1/L13 Pierrehumbert, R. T. 2010, Principles of planetary climate (Cambridge New York: Cambridge University Press) Postolec, E., Lichtenberg, T., Nicholls, H., Soucasse, L., & van der Tak, F. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.15011 Prandtl, L. 1925, Zeitschrift Angewandte Mathematik und Mechanik, 5, 136, doi: 10.1002/zamm.19250050212 Press, W. H. 2007, Numerical Recipes 3rd Edition: The Art of Scientific Computing, Numerical Recipes: The Art of Scientific Computing (Cambridge University Press) Rajpaul, V., Aigrain, S., Osborne, M. A., Reece, S., & Roberts, S. 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 452, Issue 3, p.2269-2291, 452, 2269, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1428 Rasmussen, C. E., & Williams, C. K. I. 2005, Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning (Cambridge, MA, USA: The MIT Press), doi: 10.7551/mitpress/3206.001.0001 Rauer, H., Aerts, C., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26, doi: 10.1007/s10686-025-09985-9 Raymond, S. N., & Morbidelli, A. 2022, in Astrophysics and Space Science Library, Vol. 466, Demographics of Exoplanetary Systems, Lecture Notes of the 3rd Advanced School on Exoplanetary Science, ed. K. Biazzo, V. Bozza, L. Mancini, & A. Sozzetti, 3–82, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-88124-5 1 Riegler, B., Odgers, J., & Fortuin, V. 2026, in Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 300, Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (PMLR) Rogers, J. G. 2025, Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc., 539, 2230, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf628 Rogers, J. G., & Owen, J. E. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 1526, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab529 Rogers, L. A. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 801, 41, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/801/1/41 33 

Rotman, Y., Welbanks, L., Line, M. R., et al. 2025, Astrophys. J., 989, 201, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adef04 Sastre, M., Lichtenberg, T., Soucasse, L., et al. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.20249 Savel, A. B., Bedell, M., Kempton, E. M.-R., et al. 2025, Astronomical Journal, Volume 169, Issue 3, id.135, 16 pp, 169, 135, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ada27e Savel, A. B., Kempton, E. M.-R., May, E. M., et al. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.18409 Schaefer, L., & Elkins-Tanton, L. T. 2018, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, 376, 20180109, doi: 10.1098/rsta.2018.0109 Schaefer, L., & Fegley, B. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 843, 120, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa784f Schaefer, L., Pahlevan, K., & Elkins-Tanton, L. T. 2024, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 129, e2023JE008262, doi: 10.1029/2023JE00826210.22541/ essoar.170542269.92961485/v1 Schaefer, L., & Sasselov, D. 2015, ApJ, 801, 40, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/801/1/40 Schaefer, L., Wordsworth, R. D., Berta-Thompson, Z., & Sasselov, D. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 829, 63, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/829/2/63 Schlichting, H. E. 2018, in Handbook of Exoplanets, ed. H. J. Deeg & J. A. Belmonte (Cham: Springer International Publishing), 1–20, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-30648-3 141-1 Schlichting, H. E., & Mukhopadhyay, S. 2018, Space Science Reviews, 214, 34, doi: 10.1007/s11214-018-0471-z Schubert, G. 2015, Treatise on geophysics (Elsevier) Schubert, G., Turcotte, D. L., & Olson, P. 2001, Mantle convection in the Earth and planets (Cambridge University Press) Seager, S. 2011, Exoplanets (Tucson: University of Arizona Press). https://uapress.arizona.edu/book/exoplanets Seager, S., Kuchner, M., Hier-Majumder, C. A., & Militzer, B. 2007, Astrophys. J., 669, 1279, doi: 10.1086/521346 Shorttle, O., Jordan, S., Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., & Bower, D. J. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 962, L8, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad206e Soderblom, D. R. 2010, ARA&A, 581, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081309-130806 Solomatov, V. S., & Stevenson, D. J. 1993, Journal of Geophysical Research, 98, 5391, doi: 10.1029/92JE02579 Soni, V., & Acharyya, K. 2023, doi: 10.48550/ARXIV.2302.09576 Sossi, P. A., Burnham, A. D., Badro, J., et al. 2020, Science Advances, 6, eabd1387, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd1387 Sossi, P. A., Hin, R. C., Kleine, T., Morbidelli, A., & Nimmo, F. 2025, Space Sci. Rev., 221, 118, doi: 10.1007/s11214-025-01243-w Sossi, P. A., Tollan, P. M. E., Badro, J., & Bower, D. J. 2023, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 601, 117894, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2022.117894 Spada, F., Demarque, P., Kim, Y. C., & Sills, A. 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 776, 87, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/776/2/87 Srinivas, N., Krause, A., Kakade, S. M., & Seeger, M. W. 2012, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 58, 3250, doi: 10.1109/TIT.2011.2182033 Stein, M. L. 1999, Interpolation of Spatial Data (New York, NY, USA: Springer). https: //link.springer.com/book/10.1007/978-1-4612-1494-6 Stepleman, R. S., ed. 1983, Scientific Computing: Applications of Mathematics and Computing to the Physical Sciences (North-Holland Publishing Company). https: //books.google.co.uk/books/about/Scientific Computing. html?id=6 QYAQAAIAAJ&redir esc=y Stock, J. W., Kitzmann, D., Patzer, A. B. C., & Sedlmayr, E. 2018, MNRAS, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1531 Tackley, P. J. 2023, in Dynamics of Plate Tectonics and Mantle Convection, ed. J. C. Duarte (Elsevier), 159–180, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-85733-8.00006-8 Tang, Y., Fortney, J. J., & Murray-Clay, R. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 976, 221, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad8567 Tang, Y., Fortney, J. J., Nimmo, F., et al. 2025a, Astrophys. J., 989, 28, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ade7ff Taylor, J., Tsai, S.-M., Parmentier, V., Fisher, C., & Line, M. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.06491 Tennyson, J., & Yurchenko, S. 2018, Atoms, 6, 26, doi: 10.3390/atoms6020026 Tonks, W. B., & Melosh, H. J. 1993, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 98, 5319, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/92JE02726 Trønnes, R. G., Baron, M. A., Eigenmann, K. R., et al. 2019, Tectonophysics, 760, 165, doi: 10.1016/j.tecto.2018.10.021 Tsai, S.-M., Innes, H., Wogan, N. F., & Schwieterman, E. W. 2024, ApJL, 966, L24, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad3801 Tsai, S.-M., Malik, M., Kitzmann, D., et al. 2021, The Astrophysical Journal, 923, 264, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac29bc Tsai, S.-M., Lee, E. K. H., Powell, D., et al. 2023, Nature, 617, 483, doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-05902-2 34 

Turbet, M., Bolmont, E., Chaverot, G., et al. 2021, Nature, 598, 276, doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03873-w Turcotte, D. L., & Schubert, G. 2002, Geodynamics - 2nd Edition, doi: 10.2277/0521661862 Unterborn, C. T., & Panero, W. R. 2019, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 124, 1704, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JE005844 Valencia, D., Moro-Martin, A., & Teske, J. 2025, , 19doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-99762-1.00139-X Venturini, J., Guilera, O. M., Haldemann, J., Ronco, M. P., & Mordasini, C. 2020, A&A, 643, L1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202039141 Vlasov, K., Aud´ etat, A., & Keppler, H. 2023, Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 178, 36, doi: 10.1007/s00410-023-02019-7 Wade, J., & Wood, B. J. 2005, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 236, 78, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2005.05.017 Wakeford, H. R., & Sing, D. K. 2015, Astron. Astrophys., 573, A122, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424207 Walbecq, A., Samuel, H., & Limare, A. 2025, Icarus, 434, 116513, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2025.116513 Wang, H. S., Lineweaver, C. H., & Ireland, T. R. 2018, Icarus, 299, 460, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2017.08.024 Warren, P. H. 1985, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 13, 201, doi: https: //doi.org/10.1146/annurev.ea.13.050185.001221 Way, M. J., Del Genio, A. D., Kiang, N. Y., et al. 2016, Geophys. Res. Lett., 43, 8376, doi: 10.1002/2016GL069790 Welbanks, L., Madhusudhan, N., Allard, N. F., et al. 2019, Astrophys. J. Lett., 887, L20, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab5a89 Wilson, J., Hutter, F., & Deisenroth, M. 2018, Advances in neural information processing systems, 31 Wogan, N. F., Batalha, N. E., Zahnle, K. J., et al. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 963, L7, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad2616 Wogan, N. F., Catling, D. C., Zahnle, K. J., & Claire, M. W. 2022, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 119, e2205618119, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2205618119 Wolf, A. S., & Bower, D. J. 2018, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 278, 59, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pepi.2018.02.004 Yakubu, M., & Jude, V. O. 2026, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.23766 Yu, H., Garai, Z., Cretignier, M., et al. 2025, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Volume 536, Issue 3, pp.2046-2063, 536, 2046, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2655 Zahnle, K. J., Kasting, J. F., & Pollack, J. B. 1988, Icarus, 74, 62, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(88)90031-0 Zdunkowski, W., Welch, R., & Kork, G. 1980, BEITR. PHYS. ATMOSPH.; DEU; DA. 1980; VOL. 53; NO 2; PP. 147-166; ABS. GER/FRE; BIBL. 16 REF. Zeng, L., Jacobsen, S. B., Sasselov, D. D., et al. 2019, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 116, 9723, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1812905116 Zhang, H. L., Hirschmann, M. M., Lord, O. T., et al. 2024, Sci. Adv., 10, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adp1752