Title: SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.22820v1

Published Time: Tue, 28 Jul 2026 00:16:55 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. aanda ©ESO 2026 July 28, 2026 

# SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets 

# Mineralogical constraints based on atmospheric types 

L. Sereinig 1, 2 and O. Herbort 1

> 1

Institute for Astronomy (IfA), University of Vienna, Türkenschanzstrasse 17, A-1180 Vienna 

> 2

Now at: Centre for Planetary Habitability (PHAB), Department of Geosciences, University of Oslo, PO Box 1028 Blindern, 0315 Oslo, Norway Contact: e-mail: leon.sereinig@geo.uio.no & e-mail: oliver.herbort@univie.ac.at 

Received 04.03.2026; accepted 23.07.2026 

ABSTRACT 

Context. The crust composition of rocky exoplanets with a substantial atmosphere can not be observed directly. However, recent developments are starting to allow for the observation and characterisation of their atmospheres. Understanding the link between atmospheres and crusts could allow for constraints on the crusts’ composition based on atmospheric observations. 

Aims. We aim to understand the link between the thermal stability of specific condensates and atmospheric compositions. This allows constraints on the mineralogical composition of the surface by potentially observable atmospheric features. In order to achieve this, a grid study of atmospheric and crustal compositions is conducted. 

Methods. We use a diverse range of total element abundances inspired by various rock compositions as the compositional base for our crust-atmosphere models, for which thermo-chemical and phase equilibrium is assumed. In this work, we investigate a temperature range of 500 K to 1000 K and a surface pressure of 1 bar. The resulting atmospheric compositions are classified using atmospheric types based on the most abundant gas-phase elements C, H, N, O, and S. 

Results. Some of the changes in surface mineralogy coincide with changes in atmospheric type, independent of the given total elemental abundances. In total, a link has been revealed between 23 thermally stable minerals and their corresponding atmospheric types, which is independent of the ratio of the refractory elements present. Especially, the sulphur chemistry of the minerals and the average iron oxidisation state can be constrained by the corresponding atmospheric type. 

Key words. planets and satellites: terrestrial planets – planets and satellites: atmospheres – planets and satellites: composition – planets and satellites: surfaces – astrochemistry 

1. Introduction 

Over 8000 exoplanets have been detected at the time of writing 1.Of those, about 12% can be expected to be terrestrial exoplanets which posses a solid surface 2. Due to the smaller radii of rocky exoplanets compared to Jupiter- and sub-Neptune sized planets, terrestrial exoplanets are more di ffi cult to detect, which leads to less frequent detections. The true population numbers of small, terrestrial exoplanets is currently unknown, and estimates of it might be biased towards larger Jupiter- or sub-Neptune sized ex-oplanets with close orbits around their host stars (e.g. Jiang et al. 2024; Bryson et al. 2025). Through various detection methods such as transit photometry and measurements of radial veloc-ity variations, a range of parameters can be obtained. These are size, mass, and temperature (Mayor & Queloz 1995; Henry et al. 2000; Charbonneau et al. 2000). The atmospheric composition can also be retrieved with e.g. transit spectroscopy (Richardson et al. 2007; Pont et al. 2008). Due to vast distances of exoplan-ets and small sizes of planets compared to the host star, the re-trieval of these parameters from observations is challenging. For large, Jupiter-like planets it is possible to achieve good signal to noise ratios with current observational capabilities, but since ter-restrial planets are multiple times smaller, observations are more  

> 1

https://exoplanet.eu/home/ , accessed March 2026  

> 2

exoplanet.eu , fraction of detected planets with Rp < 1.5REarth 

di ffi cult. Furthermore, terrestrial planets surfaces can starkly dif-fer from one another (e.g. Venus’, Earth’s, and Mars’ surfaces). Methods such as polarimetry (Rossi & Stam 2017), or reflection and emission spectroscopy have been proposed as possible tools to infer crustal properties of exoplanets. In theory, it could be possible to constrain terrestrial exoplanets surfaces with reflec-tion spectroscopy (currently possible on solar system bodies, e.g. Madden & Kaltenegger 2018). While these methods are poten-tially allowing for the characterisation of surfaces of bare rock planets, planets with substantial atmospheres are providing ad-ditional challenges. For example, reflection spectroscopy would have to limit itself to atmospheric windows, which in the ex-treme case of dense Venus-like atmospheres, can be narrow and few in numbers (Kappel et al. 2016). Therefore, constraining the surface compositions of terrestrial exoplanets with a substantial atmosphere is impossible or di ffi cult at best, making indirect ap-proaches necessary. Since the atmosphere and surface of rocky exoplanets are chemically interacting, their link provides an opportunity to constrain the planetary surface based on the observable atmo-sphere, which requires a good understanding of their connec-tion. One approach to model this to a first degree, is to as-sume chemical and phase equilibrium, which is likely to be reached for high temperatures. However, towards lower temper-atures the timescales to reach equilibrium become increasingly longer. This applies to the gas phase (Liggins et al. 2023) and 

Article number, page 1 of 17 arXiv:2607.22820v1 [astro-ph.EP] 24 Jul 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda 

the condensate phase (Charnoz et al. 2026). Since secondary at-mospheres form largely from outgassing, which is governed by the planets interior (see e.g. Spaargaren et al. 2020; Baumeister et al. 2025; Spohn et al. 2026), the bulk of these atmospheres form early on when the planet is still hot (leftover heat from planet formation). This means that equilibration time scales are short, and the system can therefore e ffi ciently reach an equilib-rium state between the atmosphere and the surface (e.g. Licht-enberg & Miguel 2025). Therefore, the assumption of a thermo-chemical and phase equilibrium state is reasonable for warm ex-oplanets. A similar approach has already been used for the mod-elling of Venus’ surface by Byrne et al. (2024). This motivates that it is feasible to constrain the crustal composition of exoplan-ets by observing only their atmospheres. The observation of exoplanet atmospheric compositions is becoming increasingly more routine (e.g. Fu et al. 2025), but still poses a challenge for small terrestrial worlds. Many attempted observations have returned non-detections (e.g. Xue et al. 2025; Ducrot et al. 2025; Piaulet-Ghorayeb et al. 2025). Recently, hot and possibly molten, terrestrial exoplanets have been observed to posses an atmosphere (Hu et al. 2024; Teske et al. 2025), but further observations are needed. Future missions and observato-ries such as the Extremely Large Telescope (ELT) (Gilmozzi & Spyromilio 2007), PLATO (Rauer et al. 2025), and Ariel (Tinetti et al. 2018), will provide the facilities needed to frequently mea-sure atmospheric compositions of these small exoplanets. For the modelling of exoplanet crust-atmosphere pairs, el-emental abundances should not only include volatiles such as CHNO (short for carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and oxygen), but also a range of refractory elements to accurately model the crust. For such sets of total elemental abundances, inspiration can be drawn from solar system bodies, such as Earth, CI chondrite (Lodders et al. 2009), or asteroids that had samples returned to Earth such as Ryugu (see Yokoyama et al. 2025). This work builds on the investigation of Herbort & Sereinig (2025), where an indication of an crust-atmosphere link has been reported. In this, a tentative link between the crustal composi-tions and atmospheric types based on the stability of molecules based on the elements C, H, and O has been observed. These at-mospheric types have sharply defined transitions within a CHO-parameter space (see Sect. 2.1 and Woitke et al. 2021), but because of the low number of crust-atmosphere models inves-tigated therein, it remains unclear whether the changes in sur-face mineralogy are falling along the same transition lines as changes in the atmospheric types. Therefore, this work will en-hance this investigation by generating multiple model grids cov-ering the entire CHO-atmospheric parameter space for di ff erent atmospheric temperatures, with each model in one grid based on the same set of total element abundances. Since the range of exoplanet elemental compositions is currently unknown and likely very diverse, we use multiple di ff erent sets of total element abundances to generate multiple grids. The input compositions are inspired by solar system bodies and serve as starting points, attempting to reflect the possible diversity of atmospheres. We subsequently vary carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen abundances systematically per individual model in a grid, in order to archive di ff erent atmospheric compositions. The remaining mostly re-fractory elements are held constant. This enables us to generate a grid consisting of crust-atmosphere models spanning the entire CHO-atmospheric parameter space. By keeping the mostly re-fractory element abundances the same in every model, we isolate the e ff ect of the atmospheric composition on the crustal compo-sition. By using di ff erent base sets of relative elemental abun-dances for each grid, we rule out biases stemming from the input elemental abundance in the resulting crustal compositions. The modelling of the crust-atmosphere pairs is achieved by calculation of the thermo-chemical and phase equilibrium. Due to the choice of the modelling tool, the model crusts comprise of only the pure form of condensates. In addition to these, solid solutions are also found in nature. However, modelling of these requires the usage of additional tools which is beyond this study. Here, we focus on the immediate interaction of the crust and at-mosphere, which is why we only calculate the compositions of the crust and near-crust atmosphere (introduced in Herbort et al. 2020). The compositions of the near-crust atmospheres can be used as the basis for further atmospheric modelling, which is outside the scope of the investigation of the link between atmo-spheric types and the thermal stability of minerals. An investiga-tion of the link between specific clouds and surface conditions has been presented in Herbort et al. (2022). Herbort & Sereinig (2025) have shown the potential di ff erentiation of di ff erent at-mospheric types by transmission spectroscopy. In this paper we investigate crustal compositions in phase equilibrium with atmospheric types A, B, C, α, the transitional regime between types B and C /α, and the sulphur-rich atmo-spheric type BC2. We define classes of condensate species de-pending on their stability and characteristic crustal mineral com-positions for each atmospheric type, independent of the total el-emental abundance. In Sect. 2 we provide an overview of our atmospheric and crust modelling methodology, give an overview of the atmo-spheric classification scheme in a CHO-parameter space, and give an explanation of how the model grids are generated. In Sect. 3 links between certain crust condensates and their re-spective atmospheres are shown under the model assumptions. Section 4 discusses the limitations caused by the assumption of thermo-chemical and phase equilibrium for the modelling of crust-atmosphere pairs, and discusses the implications of the the findings. Section 5 provides a summary. 

2. Methods 

Crust-atmosphere models are generated using the equilibrium chemistry solver GG chem (Woitke et al. 2018). Using a con-stant pressure, a constant temperature, and a set of element abun-dances, the thermo-chemical and phase equilibrium is solved. The resulting composition consists of gas phase particles and condensate phase particles. The gas phase composition repre-sents the atmospheric composition of the base layer of the at-mosphere and the condensate phase represents the crust compo-sition of the exoplanet. Atmospheric compositions using p, T -profiles which model a more complete atmosphere, have been previously investigated in Herbort & Sereinig (2025). The input set of element abundances consist of a set of 18 di ff erent ele-ments, which are H, C, O, N, F, Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, S, Cl, K, Ca, Ti, Cr, Mn, and Fe. For these elements, GG chem includes a to-tal of 471 gaseous species including molecules, atoms, and ions, and a total of 223 condensed species, of which 46 are liquid. 

> 2.1. Atmospheric diversity

In order to probe a large range of possible exoplanet atmo-spheres and their respective crust compositions multiple grids of crust-atmosphere models have been generated at tempera-tures ranging from 500 K to 1000 K, in 100 K increments. The atmospheric pressure has been kept at a constant 1 bar for all        

> Article number, page 2 of 17 L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets 0.00 0.05 0.10 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.30 0.35

# C/(H + O + C) 

> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> (O  − H) /(O + H)

Type A 

Type C 

Type B 

Type D 

> C/O ¯ = 0 .55
> C/Osub  − solar  = 0 .3

C/Osuper − solar = 1 

Fig. 1: Atmospheric types as described by Woitke et al. (2021). Compositions of solar system bodies atmospheres are indicated. Dashed coloured lines show constant C /O-ratios for sub-solar, solar, and super-solar C /O ratios. models. These model grids span a parameter space based on the three most abundant elements found in terrestrial exoplanets at-mospheres, carbon (C), hydrogen (H), and oxygen (O), as de-scribed in Woitke et al. (2021). The CHO parameter space also defines atmospheric types, which are distinct regions where cer-tain sets of molecular species coexist in thermo-chemical equi-librium. These regions define the atmospheric types as Type A : H 2O, CH 4, NH 3, N2 or H 2;Type B : H 2O, CO 2, N2, O2; (1) Type C : H 2O, CO 2, CH 4, N2;Type D : CO 2, CH 4, CO , N2.

The atmospheric parameter space is also displayed in Fig. 1. As stated in Woitke et al. (2021), these atmospheric types are distinct at temperatures up to 600 K, beyond that types A, C, and D merge into one single type, indicated as type α (see Herbort & Sereinig, in prep). Type B atmospheres remain unchanged at temperatures up to 1000 K resulting in the following composi-tions in atmospheric types for temperatures of 700 K to 1000 K, with Type α : CO 2, H2O, CH 4, CO , H2, N2;Type B : O 2, CO 2, H2O, N2. (2) This evolved CHO-parameter space type classification for 

T ≥ 700 K is displayed in Fig. 2. If su ffi cient amounts of sul-phur are abundant in the gas phase, compositions can lay be-yond the CHO-parameter space where sulphur abundance has to be taken into account. Janssen et al. (2023) expand the classifi-cation scheme from Woitke et al. (2021) by the inclusion of sul-phur. This leads to a number of new atmospheric subtypes, all of which contain sulphur compounds in the atmosphere. Most rele-vant for this work is the atmospheric type BC2, where SO 2, H 2O, CO 2, H 2SO 4, and N 2 coexist in thermo-chemical equilibrium in 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 

# C/(H + O + C) 

> 1.0
> 0.5
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> (O  − H) /(O + H)

# Type α

Type B 

> 700 K
> 800 K
> 900 K
> 1000 K

# S(C[s]) ≥ 1

Fig. 2: Atmospheric classification scheme for temperatures beyond 600 K. Separate regimes at lower temperatures have merged into the homogeneous regime Type α. Type B remains una ff ected and has the same definition as in the low temperature case displayed in Fig. 1. The temperature evolution of graphite supersaturation is indicated with coloured surfaces. the gas phase. Atmospheres of this type can seemingly overlap with atmospheres of type B, if investigated in a CHO-parameter space. 

2.2. Model grid generation 

In order to avoid biases from a chosen set of total element abundances, multiple input abundances based on di ff erent so-lar system bodies have been used for generating multiple crust-atmosphere model grids, with each grid based on a di ff erent set of total element abundances. Six sets of total element abun-dances (listed in table A.1) have been used for calculating model grids at temperatures from 500 K to 1000 K, in 100 K incre-ments. One set of total element abundances is an Earth inspired in-put abundance (Earth), taken from Herbort et al. (2022), which under Earth like conditions (1.013 bar, 288.15 K) reproduces Earth’s atmospheric composition with equilibrium chemistry, with the only di ff erence being a too low CH 4 abundance. How-ever, CH 4 is of biological origin and constantly produced. The co-existence of CH 4 and O 2 can be considered the disequilib-rium signal in Earth’s atmosphere due to the presence of life. Also inspired by Earth are Continental Crust (CC), Bulk Silicate Earth (BSE) (both Schaefer et al. 2012), and Mid Oceanic Ridge Basalt (MORB, a secondary crust composition in itself Arevalo & McDonough 2010) set of elemental abundances. Inspired by the very rocks that form planets, asteroids, are CI Chondrite (CI) (Lodders et al. 2009), and the composition of the asteroid Ryugu Yokoyama et al. (2025) sets of element abundances. Ryu-gus elemental abundances were measured by analysing material collected by the sample return mission Hayabusa-2. Since flu-orine (F) abundance measurements were not performed on the returned samples, it was substituted by taking the value from CI and multiplying it by a factor f defined as  

> Article number, page 3 of 17 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda

f = 117 

> 17

X

> i=1

ϵRyugu ,i

ϵCI ,i

, (3) where the ϵabundance ,i are element abundances of Ryugu and CI, respectively. Since fluorine could not be included only the remaining 17 elements were used for this factor f . A complete list of the used input abundances are given in Appendix A. In order to generate models in a grid-like fashion, spanning the entire CHO atmospheric-parameter space based on one set of elemental abundances, the C, H, and O abundances of each model have been varied, while keeping the remaining elements constant. This way, since most of the atmosphere consists of molecules formed from C, H, and O, the influence of the atmo-spheric composition on the crustal composition can be studied in isolation. Nitrogen has been kept constant, since it mainly forms N2, and does not interfere with the majority of the atmospheric type system, as discussed in Woitke et al. (2021). Additionally, the ratio of volatile-to-refractory elements has been kept con-stant to the value of the volatile-to-refractory elemental ratio of each original set of elemental abundances. This was achieved by keeping the sum of C + H + O constant while varying the individual C, H, and O abundances to generate the grid of crust-atmosphere models. Since other volatile elements such as N and S are kept constant the ratio of CHNOS-to-refractory elements remains constant for each individual model in a grid. The set of total element abundances of MORB and BSE can not form full CHO parameter space spanning grids. This is be-cause their low total C + H + O budgets (44.542 and 44.32 mass fraction percent for MORB and BSE, respectively) do not allow for su ffi cient oxygen abundances to generate oxygen dominated type B atmospheres. Even if the entire C + H + O budget is spent on oxygen, the resulting atmospheric models are dominated by molecular nitrogen (N 2), with the defining molecular species for type B atmospheres only occurring in trace amounts. The numer-ically necessary residual H is su ffi cient to keep the atmospheres in type C. In total, four full parameter space spanning model grids per temperature have been generated for this work, based on the Earth, CC, CI chondrite, and Ryugu sets of total element abun-dances. Each grid consists of about 5000 crust-atmosphere mod-els per temperature. 

3. Results 

A total of 71 di ff erent condensates are stable across the model grids. For the individual temperature grids with 1000 K, 900 K, 800 K, 700 K, 600 K, and 500 K, a set of 34, 34, 48, 53, 48, and 61 condensates are thermally stable, respectively. For the inter-pretation of the results, we define four di ff erent classes for the thermal stability of a condensate at a defined temperature. 

Class 0, omnipresent: The condensate is present in all crusts, regardless of the contacting atmospheres type and set of total element abundances. 

Class I, strongly linked: The condensate is present in all crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres of a subset of the atmo-spheric parameter space (subset of atmospheric type, full atmo-spheric type, or multiple but not all atmospheric types), indepen-dent of the given set of total element abundances (see e.g. Fig. 3). 

Class II, partially linked: The condensate is present in all crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres of a subset of the atmospheric parameter space, but can also exist in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in additional regimes of the CHO-parameter space, depending on the given set of total element abundances. 

Class III, unlinked: The condensate is unconstrained. Its stabil-ity likely strongly depends on the set of total element abundances of the model. Each class is valid at a defined temperature, e.g. a Class 0 condensate at 600 K can evolve into any of the other classes at di ff erent temperatures. A comprehensive table including all con-densates of Class 0-II, at every temperature, is provided in the appendix C. A figure with representative crustal compositions and condensate classes is provided in the appendix in Fig. B.1. Since this work is based on an equilibrium chemistry code which does not include solid solutions, each condensate is discussed as its own entity. However, in reality these condensates can exist in homogeneously mixed solid solutions. Sulphur can not be classified as a fully volatile or refractory element. Depending on the pressure, temperature, and the avail-ability of elements such as Ca, Fe, Si, and Al sulphur can be either part of the gas phase species or be thermally stable as a condensate. Therefore, the distinction between sulphur-poor at-mospheres (Sect. 3.1) and sulphur-rich atmospheres (Sect. 3.2) is made. Sulphur containing condensates show a very stable link to the atmospheres composition across all investigated tempera-tures. This is because sulphur forms condensates with elements such as Fe and Ca which heavily depend on the atmospheric re-dox conditions. This link between sulphur bearing compounds and atmospheric composition is laid out in Sect. 3.1.1 for con-densates under sulphur-poor atmospheres, and in Sect. 3.2.1 for condensates in phase equilibrium with sulphur-rich atmospheres. Iron condensates are inherently linked to the atmospheric composition due to iron’s various oxidation states, which are in-trinsically linked to the atmospheres redox potential. We note that pure iron (Fe[s]) is not directly linked to atmospheric type, since it requires extremely reducing atmospheric conditions to be stable as a condensate. The iron oxidation state of the sur-face and individual iron compounds links to the atmosphere are shown in Sects. 3.1.2 and 3.2.1 for condensates in crusts in phase equilibrium with sulphur-poor and sulphur-rich atmospheres, re-spectively. Two manganese species exhibit links to the atmospheric composition, which are described in Sect. 3.1.3 for crusts in phase equilibrium with sulphur-poor atmospheres, and in Sect. 3.2.1 for crusts in phase equilibrium with sulphur-rich atmo-spheres. An additional 13 condensates, linked to the sulphur-poor at-mospheric composition, are discussed in Sect. 3.1.4. 

> 3.1. Condensates under sulphur-poor atmospheres

Sulphur-poor atmospheres can be described using the CHO-parameter space system, introduced by Woitke et al. (2021). Here we define the sulphur-poor atmospheres as such, that the sulphur content does not exceed S /(C + H + O + S ) ≤ 0.005 at 1000 K, S /(C + H + O + S ) ≤ 0.002 at 900 K and 800 K, and S /(C + H + O + S ) ≤ 0.001 for T ≤ 700 K. This choice is motivated by the fact that overall less condensates are thermally stable in chemical and phase equilibrium at higher temperatures, and sulphur is more abundant in the gas phase as a consequence. 

> Article number, page 4 of 17 L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets

# CC 

# BSE Ryugu 

# Earth 

# CI 

# MORB 

# T = 700 K; S/(C + H + O + S) ≤ 10 −3

CaSO 4[s]

FeS 2[s]

CaSO 4[s] & FeS 2[s]

FeS 2[s] & FeS [s]

FeS [s]

Fig. 3: Solid sulphur in crusts at 700 K for all set of total element abundances (indicated in each plot). Models where the atmosphere contains more than S /(C + H + O + S ) ≥ 10 −3 are excluded. The transition from CaSO 4[s] in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres, to FeS[s] in crusts in phase equilibrium with type α atmospheres is clearly visible. All of the model grids based on di ff erent sets of total elemental abundances produce the same sequence of sulphur condensates throughout the atmospheric parameter space. This allows for the subsequent classification of the condensates displayed in this figure. Note that BSE and MORB elemental inputs do not allow for the generation of oxygen dominated type B atmospheres. Regions where the supersaturation ratio of carbon would exceed 1 are greyed out. 

> 3.1.1. Sulphur containing condensates

We find three Class I sulphur bearing condensates. These are CaSO 4[s] (calcium sulfate), FeS[s] (iron(II) sulfide), and FeS 2[s] (pyrite). All are Class I condensates for T ≤ 800 K. For temper-atures T > 800 K, FeS 2[s] is not thermally stable (Jovanovi´ c1989). The transition between the di ff erent sulphur conden-sate species in crusts across the atmospheric parameter space is shown in Fig. 3 for T = 700 K. Crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres of type A and C for T ≤ 600 K, type α for T ≥ 700 K, contain FeS[s] as the only sulphur bearing compound (blue in Fig. 3). However, two exceptions to this can be seen in the data. Firstly, in crusts in phase equilibrium with the most reducing atmospheres, where hydrogen and carbon abundances are high. There, iron is only available as Fe[s], preventing the formation of FeS[s]. In those crusts, sulphur exists as MnS[s], MgS[s], or CaS[s] (also dis-cussed in Sect. 3.3). The second exception are models based on the Earth set of total element abundances at temperatures from 800 K to 1000 K. There, type α atmospheres tend to contain up to 0.18% of S /(C + H + O + S ) in the gas phase, which leaves no sulphur available to condense (see also Fig. 8). This can be explained by the low sulphur abundance in the Earth based set of total elemental input abundances, as this does not happen in the similar CC set of total element abundances based grid, because there is enough sulphur present in the set of total element abun-dances for sulphur to be stable in both the gas and condensate phase. Oxidising type B atmospheres give rise to crusts which con-tain sulphur exclusively as sulphates ( – SO 4[s] compounds), most predominant as CaSO 4[s] (brown in Fig. 3). Only in crusts based on the total elemental abundances of Ryugu and CI, CaSO 4[s] coexists with Na 2SO 4[s]. This is due to the the dis-parity between the low abundance of calcium and high sulphur abundance in the elemental input of Ryugu and CI based mod-els. Regardless, all crusts in phase equilibrium with type B at-mospheres contain CaSO 4[s] at all temperatures investigated in this work. In between the two reducing and oxidising regimes type C/α and type B, there is a narrow transitional region of slightly di ff erent atmospheric compositions. These atmospheres contain marginally more sulphur, in the form of sulphur containing trace species in the gas phase. Crusts in phase equilibrium with these atmospheres contain sulphur in three di ff erent forms, but always with the inclusion of FeS 2[s]. Under the most reducing envi-ronment, crusts contain sulphur as FeS[s] in combination with FeS 2[s]. In the slightly more oxidising environment in this transi-tional regime of atmospheres, crusts contain FeS 2[s] exclusively. In crusts in phase equilibrium with the most oxidising compo-sitions in this transitional regime, sulphur exists as FeS 2[s] in  

> Article number, page 5 of 17 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda

FeS 2[s] & FeS[s] FeS 2[s] CaSO 4[s] & FeS 2[s] 

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

> Number density (log 10  n/nH)
> SO 2
> H2S
> H2
> CO
> COS
> CH 4
> NH 3

Fig. 4: Atmospheric trace species number densities in the tran-sitional regime. Reducing species become less abundant while oxidising become more abundant. Corresponding sulphur con-densates are displayed on the x-axis. combination with [Ca, Na 2]SO 4[s] compounds. This transition in relation to gas phase species number densities is displayed in Fig. 4. The di ff erent crust condensate compositions displayed in the atmospheric CHO-parameter space can be seen in Fig. 3 along the atmospheric type border between type alpha and B. Overall, sulphur condensates go from FeS[s] in crusts in phase equilibrium with more reducing atmospheric composi-tions in type A and C at T ≤ 600 K and type α at T ≥ 700 K, to -SO 4[s] compounds in crusts in phase equilibrium with oxidising type B atmospheres. In between the two regimes lies a narrow transitional class of atmospheric and crustal compositions. 

3.1.2. Iron in crusts under sulphur-poor atmospheres 

There are six linked iron containing compounds seen in the mod-els. Iron’s oxidation states Fe 2+ and Fe 3+ will be referred to as iron(II) and iron(III), respectively. Fe 2O3[s] (iron(III) oxide) is a Class I condensate at all temperatures examined in this work. Further linked condensate species include Fe 3O4[s] (iron(II,III) oxide), a Class I condensate at all temperatures examined in this work, except at 600 K where it is classified as Class II. FeTiO 3[s] (ilmenite) is a Class II condensate at 500 K and a Class I conden-sate for temperatures T ≥ 600 K. FeSiO 4[s] (fayalite) is a Class I condensate for T ≥ 700 K. As FeS[s] and FeS 2[s] also contain sulphur, they have been discussed in Sect. 3.1.1. Fe 2O3[s], as an iron(III) compound, exists under oxidising conditions found in all crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres, at all temperatures investigated in this work. Fe 3O4[s] is an iron(II,III) compound, therefore it is stable under moderately oxidising environments. At 500 K it exists in crusts in phase equilibrium with type C atmospheres, however depending on the set of total element abundances, it appears only in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in a complex area in the parameter space (see also upper left panel in Fig. 8). In model grids using the Earth and CC elemental abundance, Fe 3O4[s] is only stable in crusts in phase equilibrium with type C atmospheres with C/(H + O + C) ≥ 0.1 and along the type B-C border. At 600 K in model grids based on Ryugu and CI sets of total element abundances it appears in all crusts in phase equilibrium with the transitional region between types C and B. For T ≥ 700 K, Fe 3O4[s] exists in all crusts in phase equilibrium Earth 

> Iron  III
> Iron  II
> Iron

# Avg . Iron Oxidation State 

≤ 10 −3

# 500 K 700 K

# Ryugu 

# 800 K CC 

# 1000 K       

> S
> (C+H+O+S)

# Earth 

≤ 10 −3S       

> (C+H+O+S)

≤ 2 × 10 −3S        

> (C+H+O+S)

≤ 5 × 10 −3S       

> (C+H+O+S)

Fig. 5: Iron oxidation state of crusts across the parameter space. Sulphur-rich models are excluded by the application of temper-ature dependent sulphur cut-o ff values as indicated above each panel (see Sect. 3.1). The upper left panel shows the split in the crusts iron oxidation state between type A and C, which is dependent on the set of total elemental abundances. The upper right and lower left panels display the ‘nominal’ case, with a thin transitional region between the atmospheric types C and B. The lower right panel shows the high temperature case with an expanded region of stability for pure unoxidised iron in highly reducing environments. with atmospheres part of the transitional regime between type B and type α atmospheres as a Class I condensate. FeTiO 3[s] is an iron (II) compound requiring reducing con-ditions. At 500 K it exists in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in the transitional region between types B and C as a Class II condensate. Depending on the set of total element abundances, it can also exist in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C atmospheres. For T ≥ 600 K it is a Class I conden-sate appearing in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C atmospheres at 600 K, and type α for T ≥ 700 K. Fe 2SiO 4[s] is a Class II condensate at 500 K, where it ex-ists in crusts in phase equilibrium with a subset of type A at-mospheres (for the exact region see Fig. 8). In the model grid based on the CC set of total element abundances at 500 K, it also occurs in crusts where C[s] (graphite) is stable. At 600 K, 

> Article number, page 6 of 17 L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets

Fe 2SiO 4[s] is also a Class II condensate appearing in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A atmospheres, with the Earth and CC abundance-based model grids also yielding Fe 2SiO 4[s] in crusts in phase equilibrium with type C atmospheres. From 700 K to 1000 K it is a Class I condensate, appearing in all crusts in phase equilibrium with type α atmospheres. Based on all iron containing condensates, the average ox-idation state is calculated, shown in Fig. 5. The link between oxidation state and atmospheric type is clearly visible. Model grids generated at 500 K show that crusts in phase equilibrium with type A atmospheres have the average iron ox-idation state of slightly below iron(II), with the iron in crusts in phase equilibrium with the most reducing atmospheric composi-tions (high H and C abundance) being pure and unoxidised iron. Crusts in phase equilibrium with type C atmospheres have an av-erage iron oxidation state of slightly above iron(II) or iron(II,III), depending on input composition. This is shown in Fig 5 (up-per left panel). Iron rich compositions (CI, Ryugu) tend to have crusts with lower average iron oxidation states. Crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres have an average oxidation state of iron(III) exclusively. At 600 K, crusts in phase equilibrium with type A atmo-spheres, have the average iron oxidation state of slightly below iron(II), with crusts in the most reducing environment (high H and C) containing pure unoxidised iron. Crusts in phase equilib-rium with type C atmospheres have the average iron oxidation state of slightly above iron(II). Crusts under oxidising environ-ments such as type B atmospheres contain iron in the state of iron(III) exclusively. From 700 K to 1000 K, there is little evolution in the crusts average iron oxidation state. At 700 K, crusts in phase equilib-rium with type α generally adopt an average iron oxidation state of about iron(II) for all temperatures up to 1000 K. With rising temperatures, the region where pure unoxidised iron is stable ex-pands slightly, which is displayed the lower right panel in Fig. 5. Crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres have the average iron oxidation state of iron(III) from 700 K to 1000 K. Figure 5 also shows that the assumption of a constant O/H

or ( O−H)/(O+H) ratio is not su ffi cient to estimate the crusts av-erage iron oxidation state. For any given ( O− H)/(O+ H) ratio at 

T ≤ 500 K, crusts can be in phase equilibrium with atmospheres of either type, depending on the carbon content of the atmo-sphere. For T ≥ 700 K, atmospheres with ( O − H)/(O + H) > − 13

(corresponding to O/H > 0.5) can harbour crusts with di ff er-ing average iron oxidation states depending on the correspond-ing atmospheres type. Since the crusts average oxidation state depends on the contacting atmospheres type, a prediction of it based solely on the ( O − H)/(O + H) ratio is therefore not possi-ble. 

> 3.1.3. Manganese containing species under sulphur-poor atmospheres

The manganese condensate species Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s] (spessar-tine) and Mn 2O3[s] (manganese(III) oxide) are both linked to atmospheric type. At 500 K Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s] is a Class II condensate, found in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in the transi-tional regime between types C and B. Furthermore, depending on the set of total element abundances given it can also appear in crusts in phase equilibrium with types A and C. At 600 K Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s] is a Class I condensate, appearing in all crusts in phase equilibrium with types A and C atmospheres. From CC 700 K

> Mn 2O3
> Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12
> Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12
> Mn 2O3 &

Fig. 6: Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s] and Mn 2O3[s] in crusts in phase equi-librium with atmospheres across the CHO-parameter space. 700 K to 1000 K it is also classified as Class I condensate for crusts in phase equilibrium with type α atmospheres. Mn 2O3[s] contains manganese in the form of man-ganese(III), the 3 + oxidation state of manganese, which requires oxidising environments found in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. At 500 K it is a Class III condensate (uncon-strained, because it does not appear in the model grid based on the Earth set of total element abundances), whereas at 600 K it is a Class I condensate appearing in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres above ( O − H)/(O + H) = 0.3. Below that, in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres with ( O −

H)/(O+ H) ≤ 0.3, it can be replaced with Ca 2MnAl 2Si 3O13 H[s], depending on the set of total element abundances. For T = 700 K up to T = 1000 K, Mn 2O3[s] is a Class I condensate in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. It is worth mentioning that in rare instances both manganese containing species appear together in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in the transitional region between types B and 

α (see also Fig. 6). This bi-modal distribution of manganese con-taining condensates across the CHO-parameter space is shown in Fig. 6. 

> 3.1.4. Further condensate species under sulphur-poor atmospheres

MgSiO 3[s] (enstatite) is an unconstrained Class III condensate at 500 K. At 600 K and 700 K it is a Class 0 condensate. For 800 K to 1000 K, MgSiO 3[s] is a Class II condensate existing in all crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres, with the Earth and CC set of total element abundances yielding models where MgSiO 3[s] is stable in crusts in phase equilibrium with type α atmospheres as well. Crusts at 800 K and 900 K, in phase equilibrium with type α atmospheres, based on the Ryugu and CI set of total element abundances only contain MgSiO 3[s] in a subset of type α.TiO 2[s] (titanium dioxide) is a Class I condensate at 500 K, with the caveat that it is only a Class I condensate in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres with ( O−H)/(O+H) ≤ 0.3. In models based on the Earth and CC sets of total element abun-dances, crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres where the ( O − H)/(O + H) ratio is greater than 0.3, CaTiSiO 5[s]  

> Article number, page 7 of 17 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda

(titanite) takes its place. For T > 500 K it is a Class III (uncon-strained) condensate. CaTiSiO 5[s] (titanite) at 600 K and 700 K, CaTiSiO 5[s] ex-ists in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in the tran-sitional regime between type C /α and B. From 800 K to 1000 K CaTiSiO 5[s] is a Class III unconstrained condensate. SiO 2[s] (quartz) is a Class II condensate for T > 500 K. At 500 K it is unconstrained, at 600 K it exists in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. In models using the Earth and CC set of total element abundances SiO 2[s] also exists in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C atmospheres. From 700 K to 1000 K SiO 2[s] exists as a Class II condensate in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. In mod-els based on the Earth and CC set of total element abundances SiO 2[s] also exists in crusts in phase equilibrium with type α

atmospheres. Cr 2O3[s] (chromium(III) oxide) appears as a Class II con-densate at every temperature examined in this work. Cr 2O3[s] is stable in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. In model grids based on the Earth and CC set of total element abun-dances, Cr 2O3[s] also occurs in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C atmospheres at T ≤ 600 K, and in crusts in phase equilibrium with type α atmospheres at T > 600 K atmospheres. CaMgSi 2O6[s] (diopside) is found in crusts in phase equi-librium with type A atmospheres at 500 K. Ca 5P3O12 F[s] (flu-orapatite) is found in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C atmospheres at 500 K. Above T ≥ 600 K, CaMgSi 2O6[s] and Ca 5P3O12 F[s] are Class II condensates and behave the same. They exist in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C at-mospheres, and at T ≥ 700 K, type α atmospheres. Both con-densates can also occur in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres in models based on the Earth and CC set of total element abundances. The feldspar endmembers KAlSi 3O8[s] (orthoclase), CaAl 2Si 2O8[s] (anorthite), and NaAlSi 3O8[s] (albite) show various links to the atmosphere. KAlSi 3O8[s] is a Class II condensate in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmo-spheres at 500 K, 600 K and 700 K, and a Class 0 condensate for 

T ≥ 800 K. At 500 K KAlSi 3O8[s] only exists in crust in phase equilibrium with the most oxidising atmospheric compositions with ( O − H)/(O + H) ≳ 0.9. NaAlSi 3O8[s] is a Class III condensate at 500 K and 600 K. CaAl 2Si 2O8[s] is a Class III unconstrained condensate at 500 K and a Class II condensate at 600 K, occurring in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C atmospheres.CaAl 2Si 2O8[s] and NaAlSi 3O8[s] behave the same for T ≥ 700 K, both being Class II condensates in crusts in phase equilibrium with type α atmospheres up to 1000 K. MgF 2[s] (magnesium flouride) is linked to the atmospheric type at 500 K, where it exists in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. The grid based on the Earth set of total el-ement abundances also yields MgF 2[s] in crusts in phase equi-librium with atmospheres below −0.9 ≳ (O − H)/(O + H) in type A. At 600 K and 700 K, MgF 2[s] is a Class II condensate in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. At 800 K, MgF 2[s] behaves the same as at lower temperatures in models, with the exception of the CI-based model grid. There, it only ex-ists in models above 0 .9 ≈ (O−H)/(O+H). At 900 K and 1000 K MgF 2[s] stops appearing in CI set of total element abundances based models altogether and is unconstrained. Mg 3Si 4O12 H2[s] (talc) is a Class II condensate in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres at 500 K. Depend-ing on the set of total element abundances it is also found in crusts in phase equilibrium with type C and A atmospheres. At S(C[s]) ≥ 1

> Type  α

## Type B

> C/(H + O + C + S)

(O − H)/(O + H)                 

> S/(C + H + O + S) S/(C+H+O+S)≥0.002
> S/(C+H+O+S)<0.002
> 0
> 1
> -1 0

Fig. 7: The atmospheric parameter space expanded by the inclu-sion of sulphur on a 3 rd axis. The models displayed are based on the Ryugu elemental abundance and are calculated at 900 K. Models in bright orange have atmospheres with sulphur abun-dances of S /(C + H + O + S ) ≥ 0.002, which classifies them as sulphur-rich. Dark red models are classified as sulphur-poor. all other temperatures investigated in this work it is a Class III condensate. NaCl[s] (sodium chloride) is a Class II condensate for 600 K. At this temperature it is found in crusts in phase equilibrium with type A and C atmospheres. Additionally, in grids based on Earth and CC sets of total element abundances, NaCl[s] is also present in crusts in phase equilibrium with type B atmospheres. A graphical representation of all of the discussed conden-sates (including this and previous sections), excluding conden-sates purely found in the transitional regime between types C and B, is provided in Fig. 8. A tabulated version of these results is provided in Tab. C.1 and C.2. 

> 3.2. Condensates under sulphur-rich atmospheres

As stated by Janssen et al. (2023), sulphur condensation relies largely on how e ffi cient refractory elements such as Ca, Fe, Si, Mg, and Al can be assembled in refractory elements, and whether or not some Ca and Fe is left over for sulphur to bind to. That means, if these elements are in short supply or not bal-anced, sulphur can also be stable as a gas in the atmosphere. This is the case when using the sets of total element abundances based on Ryugu and CI. Despite them having 5 times more iron than the Earth and CC sets of total element abundances, Ryugu and CI contain about 4 times less Ca, about 2.7 times less Si, and about 8 times less Al. Additionally, Ryugu and CI contain about 75 times more sulphur compared to Earth and CC sets of total elemental abundances. When refractory condensates form from Ca, Fe, Si, Mg, and Al, an overabundance of iron is left over in models based on the Ryugu and CI elemental abundances. This results in the for-mation of Fe 3O4[s] (iron(II,III) oxide), which depletes oxygen from the gas phase, and in turn allows for a higher sulphur con-tent in the gas phase. In the atmosphere, sulphur then forms SO 2, which following Janssen et al. (2023), would be classi-

> Article number, page 8 of 17 L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets

fied as a type BC2 atmosphere (coexistence of SO 2, H 2SO 4,CO 2, H 2O, and N 2). The crust chemistry is then entirely dif-ferent from other models with the same CHO gas phase abun-dances but di ff erent S gas phase abundance. Atmospheres with 

S /(C + H + O + S ) ≥ 0.005 at 1000 K, S /(C + H + O + S ) ≥ 0.002 at 900 K and 800 K, and S /(C+H+O+S ) ≥ 0.001 for T ≤ 700 K are considered sulphur-rich. Only grids based on the Ryugu and CI set of total element abundances with T ≥ 600 K produce sulphur-rich atmospheres. We note that we only find sulphur-rich atmospheres with ( O − H)/(O + H) ratios above -0.3, and that the only sulphur-rich atmospheric type reached is type BC2. An example of this is shown in Fig. 7. Here, the usual CHO-parameter space is expanded by the inclusion of the atmospheric sulphur abundance on a 3 rd axis making the reason for the di ff er-ent classification apparent. Despite some models possessing the same CHO abundances as type B atmospheres, they are sulphur-rich motivating the necessary distinction between type B and type BC2 atmospheres. Notably, all sulphur-rich models at all temperatures are constrained to the curved and slanted vertical plane shown in Fig. 7. In theory, more sulphur-rich composi-tions are possible (see Janssen et al. (2023)), but not reached by the models in this work. Whether this is a physical e ff ect or not, is a subject of future investigations. 

> 3.2.1. Linked Condensates under sulphur-rich atmospheres

The two Class 0 condensates identified in this work, MgSiO 3[s] and KAlSi 3O8[s] described in Sect. 3.1.4, do also exist in crusts contacting type BC2 atmospheres. MgSiO 3[s] is a Class 0 con-densate at 600 K and 700 K, at higher temperatures its region of stability in crusts contacting atmospheres throughout the atmo-spheric CHO parameter space changes. From 800 K to 1000 K MgSiO 3[s] is a Class II condensate, existing in crusts contacting type BC2 atmospheres. KAlSi 3O8[s] is a Class 0 condensate for 

T = 800 K to T = 1000 K, therefore it also exists in all crusts contacting type BC2 atmospheres. We note that there are 25 out-lier crust models in which KAlSi 3O8[s] does not exist (discussed in Sect. 3.3). There are two linked sulphur condensates in crusts contact-ing sulphur-rich atmospheres. These are CaSO 4[s], a Class I con-densate, and Na 2SO 4[s], a Class II condensate. CaSO 4[s] exists in all crusts contacting BC2 atmospheres, at T = 600 K and 

T = 700 K. At 800 K and 900 K it exists in crusts contacting atmospheres with the sulphur content S /(C + H + O + S ) ≥ 0.6% and S /(C + H + O + S ) ≥ 6% respectively. Below these thresh-olds and at 1000 K, CaSO 4[s] is largely replaced by FeS[s]. Na 2SO 4[s] exists in crusts contacting type BC2 atmospheres from 600 K to 800 K. At 800 K it only exists in crusts contact-ing atmospheres with sulphur abundances above the threshold of 

S /(C + H +O+S ) ≥ 0.14%. The existence of Na 2SO 4[s] is likely a bias from the Ryugu and CI set of total element abundances, which are both low in Ca, inhibiting CaSO 4[s] formation, allow-ing further -SO 4[s] condensates to form. Fe 2O3[s] (iron(III) oxide) is a Class I condensate at 600 K and 700 K, existing in all crusts contacting type BC2 atmo-spheres. Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s] (spessartine) is a Class I condensate for 

T ≥ 600 K, existing in every crust in phase equilibrium with type BC2 atmospheres. MgF 2[s] is a Class II condensate at 600 K and is stable in all crusts contacting atmospheres with the type BC2. 

> 3.3. Outliers

One group of outliers are the most reducing (hydrogen- and carbon-rich) atmospheric compositions. In the CHO-parameter space, those exist at the very bottom right, close to the S (C[s]) =1line. Crusts in phase equilibrium with such type α atmospheres have di ff ering compositions compared to crusts in phase equi-librium with atmospheres of the same type (type A or α). As described in Sects. 3.1 and 3.1.2, sulphur, instead of being sta-ble in the form of FeS[s], occurs as MnS[s], MgS[s], and CaS[s]. This is because, iron exists in its pure and unoxidised form Fe[s]. At temperatures below 1000 K, less than 10 models per grid are such outliers. At 1000 K a substantial triangular region contain-ing such outliers becomes apparent (see also Fig. 8). We note that 25 crusts in phase equilibrium with type BC2 atmospheres are outliers with respect to the existence of KAlSi 3O8[s]. KAlSi 3O8[s] exists in all models across all grids as Class 0 condensate, except in 25 data points with the atmo-spheric type BC2 from 800 K to 1000 K. 

4. Discussion 

This paper is a continuation and enhancement of the investiga-tion in Herbort & Sereinig (2025), where a link between the sur-face mineralogy and the atmospheric type was implied. How-ever, each atmospheric type was only sampled by 3 to 12 models. It was therefore unclear whether transitions of the crust com-position coincide with the atmospheric type transitions or not. Furthermore, the independence of the link between the atmo-spheric types and the stability of surface minerals from the rel-ative elemental abundances of the refractory elements was be-yond the investigation in Herbort & Sereinig (2025), which fo-cussed on the observability of atmospheres of di ff erent atmo-spheric types. Within the work at hand, we have extended the temperature range, to span from 500 K to 1000 K. For such plan-ets, the assumption of an atmosphere in chemical equilibrium is more justifiable (see also Liggins et al. 2023). The assumption of thermo-chemical and phase equilibrium on which all of the models presented here are discussed in the following subsection. While Herbort & Sereinig (2025) sampled atmospheric types A-D and indicated the presence of a transitional regime between atmospheric types B and C, no sulphur rich atmospheres were discussed. This is a direct result from the lower temperatures, inhibiting the formation of sulphur rich atmospheric composi-tions. These reasons motivate this work, for which multiple com-plete grids, consisting of over 5000 crust-atmosphere models for each pair of total element abundances and temperature are gen-erated. Each of the models in such a grid is based on the same set of total elemental abundances, with varying C, H, and O abun-dances, e ff ectively isolating the e ff ect of the atmospheric compo-sition on the mineralogical crust composition. In order to avoid biases from the refractory elemental abundances, multiple grids based on di ff erent total elemental abundances are generated at each temperature. This allows to fully sample each atmospheric type and make general statements about crustal compositions found in contact with each each atmospheric type, regardless of the overall total elemental composition. Across temperatures ranging from 500 K to 1000 K we generate a total of over 150000 crust-atmosphere models. In addition to the previously sampled atmospheric types A-D including the transitional region between type B and C, we also see the emergence of sulphur-rich atmo-spheric compositions. Despite the possibility of various di ff erent sulphur-based atmospheric types (see Janssen et al. 2023), we  

> Article number, page 9 of 17 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda

only see a single one (type BC2). Overall this work assesses the stability of 71 condensates across 5 atmospheric types. In the following the limitations of the model assumptions and implications of the results are discussed. 

> 4.1. Limitations

A crust and atmosphere do not necessarily have to be in thermo-chemical and phase equilibrium with each other. Common pro-cesses such as e.g. volcanism, atmospheric loss, or photochem-istry can disrupt or prevent the system from reaching the equi-librium state in the first place. Volcanic gases are drastically hot-ter than the atmosphere itself which can introduce species that should not co-exist in equilibrium at the pressure and tempera-ture of the atmosphere. Earth’s atmosphere, according to equi-librium chemistry, should consist of O 2, N 2, CO 2, and H 2O and would be classified as type B (see also definition in Eq. 1). How-ever, due to the presence of life, CH 4 does exists in the Earth’s atmosphere, which is not possible if equilibrium chemistry is assumed. Furthermore, the lower the temperature, the longer it takes a system to reach equilibrium as reaction timescales in-crease with decreasing temperature (see e.g. Herbort et al. 2020; Liggins et al. 2023, for a discussion on timescales). If a planet experiences moderate but consistent volcanism and has a rela-tively cool atmosphere ( T < 700 K), it may never reach equi-librium (Liggins et al. 2023). Despite this fact, even if equilib-rium timescales are so large that equilibrium is never reached, every system evolves towards equilibrium. In the case of mod-erate levels of disequilibrium processes, assuming equilibrium as a first order approximation will not yield drastically di ff er-ent results to reality. This is shown in Herbort et al. (2022) on the example of the Earth’s atmosphere. Earth experiences vol-canism, harbours an ecosystem, and is subject to atmospheric loss and photochemistry. Modelling Earth’s atmosphere using equilibrium chemistry yields a composition which lays within a couple of ppm of the actual composition with the exception of CH 4, showcasing the reasonable character of such equilibrium models. Similarly, Venus’ atmosphere can also be modelled with GG chem , as demonstrated by Rimmer et al. (2021) and including the crust by Byrne et al. (2024). The investigation of disequilibrium processes lies beyond the scope of this work. Since the term ‘disequilibrium processes’ includes a large amount of various di ff erent processes, many of which are not fully understood, the inclusion of only a couple of those would not make the model complete. Chemical reaction networks grow exponentially with the number of included elements /species, which is at some point limited by computational power. Additionally, many reaction rates do not exist yet, leading to incomplete, potentially mis-leading results. Due to this, chemical reaction networks are of-ten constrained to the CHNOS elements (e.g. Rimmer & Helling 2016; Jordan et al. 2021; Tsai et al. 2024) which would not be suitable for the modelling of the surface composition. As mentioned, volcanism and outgassing have been disre-garded in this work. For moderately warm ( T ≥ 700 K) plan-ets, observed during volcanically dormant periods, this is not a problem as at least the gas phase of these systems should evolve towards equilibrium (Liggins et al. 2023). Especially for form-ing secondary atmospheres, volcanism and outgassing are the most important processes governing the composition of the at-mosphere (e.g. Schaefer et al. 2012; Gaillard & Scaillet 2014). To include these, interior models (e.g Spaargaren et al. 2020; Baumeister et al. 2025) have to be more extensively coupled to atmospheric models, which is part of future work. The work presented here is based on GG chem and there-fore the minimisation of Gibbs free energy of pure condensates. While a system of such condensates will strive towards this ideal state, it remains a question whether such state will be reached. Here discussions on timescales for condensation, annealing, and chemisorption in order to equilibrate the condensate phase be-come important. Such discussion has been presented in Sect. 7 of Herbort et al. (2020). While the condensation, the reaction from gas phase to condensate phase, either directly or by gas-gas reactions, is e ffi cient due to the presence of a large surface area even at low tempartures, the annealing time, the restructur-ing of condensates to form other condensates, rises significantly with lower temperatures, while chemisorption, the incorporation of some condensate into another existing mineral, remains faster at similar temperatures. The latter is especially relevant for ex-ample for the inclusion of OH or H 2O groups in phyllosilicates (Thi et al. 2020), allowing this process to be e ffi cient down to temperatures even below 100 K. Furthermore, minerals, which are predicted to not be thermally stable in contact with a given at-mosphere should react to the stable form. A prominent example of a mineral formed in the mantle and brought to Earth’s surface, which is decaying on short timescales under Earth’s atmospheric conditions is FeS 2[s] (see Newman 1998; Larkin 2011, and ref-erences therein). Charnoz et al. (2026) present a framework, which provides insight to non-equilibrium condensation in a protoplanetary disk. In their model, they assume a gas phase in chemical equilibrium at all temperatures as a basis for their condensation. The con-densation kinetics are parameterised by gas-gas reactions for the initial formation of condensates and gas-grain reactions, which transforms one mineral into another. Charnoz et al. (2026) inves-tigate pressures of 10 −9 bar to 10 −2 bar and cooling timescales from 0.01 yr to 1000 yr. For models towards the high end of their parameter space, they suggest good agreement between equilib-rium and kinetic condensation, if the temperature is high enough (T ≥ 800 K). Further extrapolating these models to the surface mineralogy of rocky planets introduces changes in pressure by orders of magnitudes and necessitates investigations over geo-logical timescales on the order of Gyr. In the model presented here, we focus on atmospheric pressures of 1 bar, of which only a small subset is hydrogen dominated. Adapting this model to di ff erent atmospheric compositions, higher pressures, and longer timescales should increase the parameter space, in which equi-librium condensation is applicable, as all of these changes should decrease the gas-grain reaction rates discussed in Charnoz et al. (2026). Extending such a condensation kinetics model to plane-tary environments is beyond the scope of this paper. Furthermore, the current implementation of GG chem does not include e ff ects such as solid solutions and the formation of partial melts. Further tools such as P erple _X (Connolly 2009), Exo Plex (Lorenzo 2018), or MAGEM in Riel et al. (2022) could be used to investigate changes induced by such e ff ects. These can shine light onto the stability of minerals found in this study, both on the surface and in the interior, for example in case of non-stagnant lid planets. Here, the results from this work can be used as a boundary conditions for the surface mineralogy. The models investigated in this work only include the solid surface and the atmospheric layer in direct contact with the sur-face. However, transit observations are only able to probe the upper layers of any given atmosphere, where pressures are rela-tively low (e.g Madhusudhan & Seager 2009). This leads to the possible scenario where atmospheres which are chemically dis-tinct at the base layer, lose their chemical uniqueness because of chemical evolution with height (e.g. condensation of cloud parti-

> Article number, page 10 of 17 L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets

cles, see also Mbarek & Kempton 2016; Loftus et al. 2019; Her-bort et al. 2022). This can then blur the sharp transitions in crust composition seen in this work in real life observations. Previous works show that if a p, T -profile is assumed atmospheric com-positions can in fact converge or diverge along the p, T -profile. However this e ff ect is less pronounced at higher temperatures (T ≥ 600 K), and does not change the atmospheres type, except for atmospheres with high nitrogen content which can lead to at-mospheres changing types from C to A with altitude (Herbort & Sereinig 2025). Further study is needed, possibly a similar grid study with the inclusion of a p, T -profile for every grid point. Since the shape of the p, T -profile is largely governed by the incoming stellar flux, future work could incorporate stellar flux into p, T -profile calculation (e.g. with ARC iS Min et al. 2020). The modelling in this work neglects the shape of planets, which are inherently 3D objects. For example, the day and night side of a planet have di ff erent temperatures, which can cause sig-nificantly di ff erent patterns in atmospheric and surface composi-tion as well as cloud coverage (e.g. Kite et al. 2016; Turbet et al. 2021; Powell et al. 2024). Extreme cases would be tidally locked planets, with one side in eternal day and the other side in eternal darkness. This can lead to drastic temperature di ff erences, which would change both the crusts and atmospheres composition. A similar e ff ect is seen at the poles, where the incident angle of stellar radiation is shallower, causing lower temperatures. For the results of this work to apply, geological timescales should be much longer than the rotation period of the planet. The overall element availability does play a big role in the final composition of a planet. In this work di ff erent sets of total element abundances lists were used to prevent biases. Nonethe-less, all sets of total element abundances are based on bodies of the solar system, which in itself is a bias towards the solar systems composition. To generate models with crust composi-tions that are as accurate and complete as possible, 18 input el-ements were used. Elemental abundances found in stars or in protoplanetary disks could inform exoplanet modelling, but cur-rently focus on mostly volatiles (e.g. Keyte et al. 2024). Current modelling of exoplanets compositions based on stellar compo-sitions (Spaargaren et al. 2023, 2025), and future disk observa-tions might provide more complete elemental abundance mea-surements to inform terrestrial exoplanet (crust and bulk compo-sition) modelling. If an atmosphere consists of more than around 1% sul-phur content, an atmosphere could potentially fall into an atmo-spheric subtype defined by the existence of sulphur species. This changes the crusts composition compared with crusts contact-ing atmospheres with the same x and y coordinates in the CHO parameter space. This work o ff ers some constraints on crusts in phase equilibrium with type BC2 atmospheres. However, other sulphur rich atmospheric types as described in Janssen et al. (2023) require further investigation of their presence at these temperatures requires additional work. This work shows that based on our models up to 1000 K, none of the other subtypes exist. 

> 4.2. Implications

The condensates described in this work in Sect. 3 (see also Fig. 8 and the Tables in Appendix C), are linked to atmospheric type. If a future observation constrains a terrestrial exoplanets atmo-sphere to an atmospheric type and a certain surface tempera-ture, by for example observing features of the defining gas phase molecules (listed in Equations 1 and 2, model spectra in Herbort & Sereinig (2025)) or constraints on the abundances of the ele-ments C, H, and O, this work can in principle o ff er constraints on the surface‘s composition. Changes in pressures and temperatures along a p, T -profile, can lead to similarly sharp transitions of condensate species as seen in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in the CHO-parameter space in this work. Byrne et al. (2024) demon-strate this on the example of Venus, tracking condensate species along the p, T -profile of Venus. This motivates further investi-gation of pressure space, which could be done by repeating this works grid study at di ff erent pressures. With the findings of this work the highly degenerate question of constraining compositions of terrestrial exoplanet surfaces is a step closer to being answered. Besides observationally deter-mining the atmospheric composition to an atmospheric type, it is also necessary to know the planetary surface temperature and pressure su ffi ciently precisely in order to accurately assess the presence of specific surface minerals. To apply the findings of this work, new observational techniques are not required, rather, existing and constantly improving observational techniques such as transit spectroscopy can be employed. The transitions of sur-face mineralogy are sudden in the CHO-parameter space and of-ten stable over a range of temperatures. The fact that the crust composition can be linked to the corresponding atmospheric type means that future observations do not have to be precise enough to constrain the exact CHO elemental abundances of the atmosphere for inferring the crustal composition. Instead, con-straining the atmosphere to a specific type allows to put con-straints on the surface mineralogy. 

5. Summary 

This work has investigated the link between atmospheric and surface compositions for rocky planets with 1 bar atmospheres across temperatures from 500 K to 1000 K. It continues the in-vestigation done in Herbort & Sereinig (2025), and better re-solves the ambiguous link, thanks to the much finer sampling of the CHO-atmospheric parameter space. The model grids are based on Earth, CC, Ryugu, CI, BSE, and MORB total element abundances to prevent biases. Based on the results described in sections 3.1 and 3.2, it is possible to predict a range of crust con-densates per atmospheric type and per temperature. The abun-dances of condensate species are displayed in Fig. B.1 for a few representative models. The major findings of this paper can be summarised as fol-lows: 

– The atmospheric compositions reach distinct types, defined especially by the presence of O 2, SO 2, H 2, and the co-existence of CH 4 and CO 2.

– While in theory the 3D parameter space of C, S, and 

O − H/O + H could be populated, we find only two distinct planes occurring (see Fig. 7). 

– Many transitions in condensates follow the changes in atmo-spheric types directly and suggest that the thermal stability of some minerals can in principle be constrained by observa-tions of the atmosphere (see Fig. 8). 

– The oxidisation state of iron follows distinct changes, reflect-ing the atmospheric types (see Fig. 5). A more detailed overview of the di ff erent minerals stable for specific atmospheric types at a given temperature is provided in the following. At 500 K, atmospheric types A, B, C, and the tran-sitional regime exist. At 600 K, the same types with the addition 

> Article number, page 11 of 17

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda CaSO 4, Fe 2O3, MgF 2,

KAlSi 3O8,

FeS , FeTiO 3, Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 ,

CaMgSi 2O6, Ca 5P3O12 F,

CaAl 2Si 2O8, MgSiO 3, NaCl ;

Same as type C

+Fe 2SiO 4

SiO 2;

Cr 2O3, MgSiO 3,

+Mn 2O3         

> CaSO 4,Fe 2O3,Mn 2O3,SiO 2,
> KAlSi 3O8,Cr 2O3,MgSiO 3;
> FeTiO 3,Fe 2SiO 4,
> CaMgSi 2O6,Ca 5P3O12 F,
> CaAl 2Si 2O8,NaAlSi 3O8;
> Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 ,KAlSi 3O8;
> +FeS

CaSO 4, Fe 2O3, Mn 2O3, SiO 2,

KAlSi 3O8, Cr 2O3, MgSiO 3;

FeTiO 3, Fe 2SiO 4,

CaMgSi 2O6, Ca 5P3O12 F,

Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 , KAlSi 3O8,

CaAl 2Si 2O8, NaAlSi 3O8;

+FeS          

> +MgSiO 3
> CaSO 4,Fe 2O3,Mn 2O3,SiO 2,
> KAlSi 3O8,Cr 2O3,MgSiO 3;
> FeTiO 3,Fe 2SiO 4,
> Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 ,KAlSi 3O8,
> CaAl 2Si 2O8,NaAlSi 3O8;
> CaMgSi 2O6,Ca 5P3O12 F,
> +MgF 2
> +FeS
> +MgSiO 3

FeS ,

+Fe 2SiO 4

FeS , Ca 5P3O12 F,

Mg 3Si 4O12 H2;

+TiO 2

CaSO 4, Fe 2O3, MgF 2, Cr 2O3,

+KAlSi 3O8

+Fe 3O4

CaMgSi 2O6;

Ca 5P3O12 F;

FeS , Fe 2SiO 4, FeTiO 3,

CaMgSi 2O6, Ca 5P3O12 F,

CaAl 2Si 2O8, NaAlSi 3O8;

CaSO 4, Fe 2O3, MgF 2, Mn 2O3, SiO 2,

KAlSi 3O8, Cr 2O3, MgSiO 3;

Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 , MgSiO 3,

0.0  0.0 

0.0 

# T = 500 K T = 600 K T = 700 K

# T = 800 K T = 900 K T = 1000 K

# *

Fig. 8: All condensates linked to sulphur-poor atmospheric types A, B, C, and α at all temperatures investigated in this work. Con-densates found in all crusts in phase equilibrium with all compositions in an atmospheric type are indicated with white or coloured text. Regions in the parameter space where condensates are stable in crusts in phase equilibrium with a subset of atmospheric com-positions of an atmospheric type are indicated with black dashed outlines. Gray surfaces indicate where graphite is supersaturated, white areas indicate missing data. Note that condensates in crusts in phase equilibrium with type BC2 and the transitional regions between types B and C /α are excluded from this figure. For a full description see Sect. 5 and Appendix C. ∗: The black triangular area in the parameter space for 1000 K encompasses heavily reducing atmospheres where crust compositions di ff er. Due to heavily reducing conditions, iron exists as unoxidised Fe[s], causing sulphur to exist as MnS[s], MgS[s], and CaS[s]. of type BC2 exist. From 700 K and onwards to 1000 K, atmo-spheric types A and C merge into type α, type B and the tran-sitional regime stay the same compared to lower temperatures, and higher and higher sulphur abundances are possible in atmo-spheric compositions in type BC2 as the temperature rises. 

500 K: 

Type A: FeS[s], CaMgSi 2O6[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s]; In a subset of type A: Fe 2SiO 4[s]; 

Type B: CaSO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], MgF 2[s], Cr 2O3[s], Mg 3Si 4O12 H2[s]; In a subset of type B: KAlSi 3O8[s], TiO 2[s]; 

Type C: FeS[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s]; In a Subset of type C: Fe 3O4[s]; 

Type BC2: Non-existent 

Transitional regime: FeS 2[s], FeTiO 3[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s]; 

600 K: 

Type A: FeS[s], FeTiO 3[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], Fe 2SiO 4[s], CaMgSi 2O6[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s], CaAl 2Si 2O8[s], MgSiO 3[s], NaCl[s]; 

Type B: CaSO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], MgF 2[s], MgSiO 3[s], SiO 2[s], KAlSi 3O8[s], Cr 2O3[s]; In a subset of type B: Mn 2O3[s]; 

Type C: FeS[s], FeTiO 3[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], CaMgSi 2O6[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s], CaAl 2Si 2O8[s], MgSiO 3[s], NaCl[s]; 

Type BC2: CaSO 4[s], Na 2SO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], MgF 2[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Transitional regime: FeS 2[s], Fe 3O4[s], CaTiSiO 5[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

700 K: 

Type α: FeS[s], FeTiO 3[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], Fe 2SiO 4[s], CaMgSi 2O6[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s], CaAl 2Si 2O8[s], NaAlSi 3O8[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Type B: CaSO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], MgF 2[s], Mn 2O3[s], SiO 2[s], KAlSi 3O8[s], Cr 2O3[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Type BC2: CaSO 4[s], Na 2SO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Transitional regime: FeS 2[s], Fe 3O4[s], CaTiSiO 5[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Article number, page 12 of 17 L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets 

800 K: 

Type α: FeTiO 3[s], Fe 2SiO 4[s], CaMgSi 2O6[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], CaAl 2Si 2O8[s], NaAlSi 3O8[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; In a subset of type α: FeS[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Type B: CaSO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], Mn 2O3[s], SiO 2[s], KAlSi 3O8[s], Cr 2O3[s], MgSiO 3[s]; In a subset of type B: MgF 2[s]; 

Type BC2: Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], MgSiO 3[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; In a subset of type BC2: CaSO 4[s], Na 2SO 4[s]; 

Transitional regime: FeS 2[s], Fe 3O4[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; 

900 K: 

Type α: FeTiO 3[s], Fe 2SiO 4[s], CaMgSi 2O6[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], CaAl 2Si 2O8[s], NaAlSi 3O8[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; In a subset of type α: FeS[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Type B: CaSO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], Mn 2O3[s], SiO 2[s], KAlSi 3O8[s], Cr 2O3[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Type BC2: Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], MgSiO 3[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; In a subset of BC2: CaSO 4[s]; 

Transitional regime: Fe 3O4[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; 

1000 K: 

Type α: FeTiO 3[s], Fe 2SiO 4[s], CaMgSi 2O6[s], Ca 5P3O12 F[s], Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], CaAl 2Si 2O8[s], NaAlSi 3O8[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; In a subset of type α: FeS[s]; 

Type B: CaSO 4[s], Fe 2O3[s], Mn 2O3[s], SiO 2[s], KAlSi 3O8[s], Cr 2O3[s], MgSiO 3[s]; 

Type BC2: Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s], MgSiO 3[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; 

Transitional regime: Fe 3O4[s], KAlSi 3O8[s]; These are the crustal compositions which can be expected on terrestrial exoplanet surfaces given atmospheric type, with the respective temperatures, and 1 bar of surface pressure. A visual-isation of this list is provided in Fig. 8, excluding type BC2 and the transitional regions between types B and C /α.

Acknowledgements. The authors thank R.J. Spaargaren and L. Müller for their valuable discussions on (exoplanet) mineralogy. LS acknowledges funding by the Research Council of Norway (RCN), through its Centres of Excellence fund-ing scheme, projects number 332523 (PHAB, Centre for Planetary Habitabil-ity), and the researcher project number 358248 (GREP, Galactic Recipe for Exo-Planets). OH acknowledges financial support by FFG under grant number 62545255. 

References 

Arevalo, Ricardo, J. & McDonough, W. F. 2010, Chemical Geology, 271, 70 Baumeister, P., Miozzi, F., Guimond, C. M., et al. 2025, Space Sci. Rev., 221, 123 Bryson, S., Kunimoto, M., Belikov, R., et al. 2025, PASP, 137, 124401 Byrne, X., Shorttle, O., Jordan, S., & Rimmer, P. B. 2024, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 527, 10748 Charbonneau, D., Brown, T. M., Latham, D. W., & Mayor, M. 2000, Astrophys-ical Journal, 529, L45 Charnoz, S., Aléon, J., Chaussidon, M., et al. 2026, Nature, 652, 925 Connolly, J. A. D. 2009, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 10 Ducrot, E., Lagage, P.-O., Min, M., et al. 2025, Nature Astronomy, 9, 358 Fu, G., Stevenson, K. B., Sing, D. K., et al. 2025, ApJ, 986, 1 Gaillard, F. & Scaillet, B. 2014, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 403, 307 Gilmozzi, R. & Spyromilio, J. 2007, The Messenger, 127, 3 Henry, G. W., Marcy, G. W., Butler, R. P., & Vogt, S. S. 2000, Astrophysical Journall, 529, L41 Herbort, O. & Sereinig, L. 2025, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 699, A67 Herbort, O., Woitke, P., Helling, C., & Zerkle, A. 2020, Astronomy & Astro-physics, 636, A71 Herbort, O., Woitke, P., Helling, C., & Zerkle, A. L. 2022, Astronomy & Astro-physics, 658, A180 Hu, R., Bello-Arufe, A., Zhang, M., et al. 2024, Nature, 630, 609 Janssen, L. J., Woitke, P., Herbort, O., et al. 2023, Astronomische Nachrichten, 344 Jiang, J. H., Rosen, P. E., Liu, C. X., Wen, Q., & Chen, Y. 2024, Galaxies, 12, 86 Jordan, S., Rimmer, P. B., Shorttle, O., & Constantinou, T. 2021, Astrophysical Journal, 922, 44 Jovanovi´ c, D. 1989, Journal of thermal analysis, 35, 1483 Kappel, D., Arnold, G., & Haus, R. 2016, Icarus, 265, 42 Keyte, L., Kama, M., Booth, A. S., Law, C. J., & Leemker, M. 2024, MNRAS, 534, 3576 Kite, E. S., Fegley, Jr., B., Schaefer, L., & Gaidos, E. 2016, ApJ, 828, 80 Larkin, N. R. 2011, NatSCA News, 21, 35 Lichtenberg, T. & Miguel, Y. 2025, Treatise on Geochemistry, 7, 51 Liggins, P., Jordan, S., Rimmer, P. B., & Shorttle, O. 2023, Journal of Geophys-ical Research (Planets), 128, e2022JE007528 Lodders, K., Palme, H., & Gail, H. P. 2009, Landolt Börnstein, 4B, 712 Loftus, K., Wordsworth, R. D., & Morley, C. V. 2019, ApJ, 887, 231 Lorenzo, Jr., A. M. 2018, Master’s thesis, Arizona State University Madden, J. H. & Kaltenegger, L. 2018, Astrobiology, 18, 1559 Madhusudhan, N. & Seager, S. 2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 707, 24 Mayor, M. & Queloz, D. 1995, Nature, 378, 355 Mbarek, R. & Kempton, E. M.-R. 2016, ApJ, 827, 121 Min, M., Ormel, C. W., Chubb, K., Helling, C., & Kawashima, Y. 2020, Astron-omy & Astrophysics, 642, A28 Newman, A. 1998, Geological Curator Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., Benneke, B., Turbet, M., et al. 2025, The Astrophysical Journal, 989, 181 Pont, F., Knutson, H., Gilliland, R. L., Moutou, C., & Charbonneau, D. 2008, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 385, 109–118 Powell, D., Wordsworth, R., & Öberg, K. 2024, ApJ, 974, L4 Rauer, H., Aerts, C., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26 Richardson, L. J., Deming, D., Horning, K., Seager, S., & Harrington, J. 2007, Nature, 445, 892–895 Riel, N., Kaus, B. J. P., Green, E. C. R., & Berlie, N. 2022, Geo-chemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 23, e2022GC010427, e2022GC010427 2022GC010427 Rimmer, P. B. & Helling, C. 2016, ApJS, 224, 9 Rimmer, P. B., Jordan, S., Constantinou, T., et al. 2021, The Planetary Science Journal, 2, 133 Rossi, L. & Stam, D. M. 2017, A&A, 607, A57 Schaefer, L., Lodders, K., & Fegley, B. 2012, Astrophysical Journal, 755, 41 Spaargaren, R. J., Ballmer, M. D., Bower, D. J., Dorn, C., & Tackley, P. J. 2020, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 643, A44 Spaargaren, R. J., Herbort, O., Wang, H. S., Mojzsis, S. J., & Sossi, P. 2025, A&A, 703, A218 Spaargaren, R. J., Wang, H. S., Mojzsis, S. J., Ballmer, M. D., & Tackley, P. J. 2023, ApJ, 948, 53 Spohn, T., Roberge, A., Way, M. J., et al. 2026, Space Sci. Rev., 222, 9 Teske, J. K., Wallack, N. L., Piette, A. A. A., et al. 2025, ApJ, 995, L39 Thi, W. F., Hocuk, S., Kamp, I., et al. 2020, A&A, 635, A16 Tinetti, G., Drossart, P., Eccleston, P., et al. 2018, Experimental Astronomy, 46, 135 Tsai, S.-M., Parmentier, V., Mendonça, J. M., et al. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 963, 41 Turbet, M., Bolmont, E., Chaverot, G., et al. 2021, Nature, 598, 276 Woitke, P., Helling, C., Hunter, G., et al. 2018, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 614, A1 Woitke, P., Herbort, O., Helling, C., et al. 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 646, A43 Xue, Q., Zhang, M., Coy, B. P., et al. 2025, ApJ, 995, L52 Yokoyama, T., Dauphas, N., Fukai, R., et al. 2025, Geochemical Journal, 59, 45 

Article number, page 13 of 17 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda 

Appendix A: set of total element abundances 

Table A.1: Elemental mass fractions of the sets of element abundances used in this work. Earth CC CI Ryugu MORB BSE 1 2 3 4 5 2H 0.3341 0.045 1.992 1.034159 0.023 0.006 C 1.957 0.199 3.52 4.514885 0.019 0.006 O 50.1 47.2 46.42 39.694165 44.5 44.42 C+H+O 52.3911 47.444 51.932 45.243209 44.542 44.432 N 0.0253 0.006 0.289 0.146115 5.5E-05 8.8E-05 F 0.0482 0.053 0.0059 0.0241 ∗ 0.017 0.002 Na 2.145 2.36 0.505 0.612898 2.012 0.29 Mg 1.999 2.20 9.790 11.126626 4.735 22.01 Al 7.234 7.96 0.8680 0.917588 8.199 2.12 Si 26.17 28.8 10.820 12.613700 23.62 21.61 P 0.0691 0.076 0.098 0.130840 0.057 0.008 S 0.0636 0.07 5.411 5.729325 0.11 0.027 Cl 0.0427 0.047 0.071 0.077981 0.014 0.004 K 1.945 2.14 0.055 0.052457 0.152 0.02 Ca 3.499 3.85 0.933 1.397637 8.239 2.46 Ti 0.3644 0.401 0.046 0.047633 0.851 0.12 Cr 0.0118 0.013 0.268 0.269418 0.033 0.29 Mn 0.0654 0.072 0.195 0.250123 0.132 0.11 Fe 3.926 4.32 18.710 20.067360 7.278 6.27 Notes: The mass fraction values of H, C, and O are the original values of the listed set of elemental abundances. These will be di ff erent in each individual model making up a crust-atmosphere model grid. However the sum of C + H + O (indicated in row 4) is kept constant in each model in the respective crust-atmosphere model grid. All remaining elemental abundances are constant and the same in each individual model across a model grid. 

∗: Value substituted as described in Eq. 3. 1: Herbort et al. (2022) 2: Schaefer et al. (2012) 3: Lodders et al. (2009) 4: Yokoyama et al. (2025) 5: Arevalo & McDonough (2010) 

Appendix B: Crust condensate abundances 

> Article number, page 14 of 17

L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets Figure ??: Crust compositions in phase equilibrium with all atmospheric types examined in this work. Di ff erences in 

> crustal compositions under di ff erent atmospheric types become apparent.
> Class 0
> Class I
> Class II in main type
> Class II in secondary type
> Unconstrained
> −3.22
> −2.86 −2.86
> 800  K
> log 10 (nfrac %)
> MgSiO 3SiO 2
> Fe 2O3 KAlSi 3O8
> CaSO 4
> Cr 2O3Mn 2O3
> MgF 2
> FeS
> CaAl 2Si 2O8 FeTiO 3
> NaCl
> Ca 5P3O12 F
> CaMgSi 2O6
> Fe 2SiO 4
> MgSiO 3
> SiO 2
> Na 2SO 4
> CaSO 4
> Mn 2O3 Cr 2O3
> KAlSi 3O8
> FeS
> Fe 2SiO 4
> CaAl 2Si 2O8
> Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12
> Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12
> FeTiO 3
> CaMgSi 2O6
> Ca 5P3O12 F
> NaAlSi 3O8
> Fe 2O3
> 600  K
> log 10 (nfrac %)
> Fig. B.1: The abundances of crust condensates are shown in number fractions % for specified total elemental abundances. All crust compositions are in phase equilibrium with the specified atmospheric type. Each crust composition displayed is the closest model to specified parameter space coordinates (600 K: Type A, C /(O +H+C) =0.05, (O-H) /(O +H) =-0.75; Type C, C /(O +H+C) =0.08, (O-H) /(O +H) =-1 /3; Type B, C /(O +H+C) =0.1, (O-H) /(O +H) =0.5; 800 K: Type Alpha, C /(O +H+C) =0.08, (O-H) /(O +H) =-0.7; Type B, C /(O +H+C) =0.1, (O-H) /(O +H) =0.5; Type BC2, C /(O +H+C) =0.1, (O-H) /(O +H) =0.5, S /(C +H+O+S) =0.06, with exclusion of all sulphur-poor models) respectively and is representative of crusts in phase equilibrium with the entire atmospheric type. Abundances of individual condensates may change in crusts found in phase equilibrium throughout the respective type, however, the set of Class 0, Class I, and Class II (in main type) condensates do not change (except in rare cases see e.g. FeS[s] at  T ≥ 800 K in Table C.2. All constrained condensates (Class 0-II) are labelled in the plot and the legend, while unconstrained (Class III) condensates are only labelled in the legend.

Article number, page 15 of 17 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda 

Appendix C: Linked condensates 

Table C.1: Overview of classification of di ff erent minerals for temperatures of 500 K, 600 K, and 700 K. 500K 600K 700K Class 0 Class I Class II Class 0 Class I Class II Class 0 Class I Class II MgSiO 3[s] X XCaSO 4[s] B B, BC2 B, BC2 Na 2SO 4[s] BC2 B BC2 B

Fe 2O3[s] B B, BC2 B, BC2 MgF 2[s] BA⋆ B, BC2 A,C Bα

TiO 2[s] B∗

Mg 3Si 4O12 H2[s] BA,C

Mn 2O3[s] B† BFeS 2[s] T T TFeTiO 3[s] TA,C A,C α

FeS[s] A, C A, C α

SiO 2[s] BA,C Bα

KAlSi 3O8[s] BA,C⊗ BA,C Bα

Cr 2O3[s] BA,C BA,C Bα

Fe 3O4[s] C△ TC TNaCl[s] A,C B

Mn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s] TA,C A, C, BC2 α, BC2 Fe 2SiO 4[s] AC▽ AC α

CaTiSiO 5[s] TB TB

CaMgSi 2O6[s] AC,B A,C B αB

Ca 5P3O12 F[s] A,C B A,C B αB

CaAl 2Si 2O8[s] A,C B αB

NaAlSi 3O8[s] αB

Notes: Existence of a crust species at a certain temperature is indicated with which atmospheric type(s) the condensate exists. Lowercase text in Class II indicates under which atmospheric type the condensate has also appeared depending on the elemental input composition. The transitional class of atmospheric compositions between types C and B (500 K, 600 K), and types α and B (700 K, 800 K, 900 K, 1000 K), is referred to as T. 

⋆: MgF 2[s] can also exist in crusts in phase equilibrium with atmospheres in a subregion of type A below ( O − H)/(O + H) = −0.9depending on the input composition. 

∗: TiO 2[s] is only present below ( O − H)/(O + H) = 0.3. 

△: Fe 3O4[s] is present in a complex subset of C. 

▽: Fe 2SiO 4[s] is only present in crusts in phase equilibrium with a subset of type A and is also present in crusts where graphite is stable in crusts contacting type C atmospheres. 

⊗: KAlSi 3O8[s] is only present in all grids in crusts contacting type B atmospheres where ( O − H)/(O + H) ≥ 0.9. 

†: Mn 2O3[s] is only present in crusts contacting atmospheres with ( O − H)/(O + H) ≥ 0.3. Below that, Earth and CC input abundances yield Ca 2MnAl 2Si 3O13 H[s] as the dominant Mn condensate. 

> Article number, page 16 of 17 L. Sereinig and O. Herbort : SCoRE: the Surface Composition of Rocky Exoplanets

Table C.2: Like Table C.1, but for temperatures of 800 K, 900 K, and 1000 K. 800K 900K 1000K Class 0 Class I Class II Class 0 Class I Class II Class 0 Class I Class II MgSiO 3[s] B, BC2, α⊙ B, BC2, α⊙ B, BC2 α

CaSO 4[s] B, BC2 ⊗ B, BC2 △ BNa 2SO 4[s] BC2 B▽

Fe 2O3[s] B B BMgF 2[s] Bα∗

Mn 2O3[s] B B BFeS 2[s] TFeTiO 3[s] α α α×

FeS[s] α‡ α‡ α‡

SiO 2[s] Bα Bα Bα

KAlSi 3O8[s] X† X† X†

Cr 2O3[s] Bα Bα Bα

Fe 3O4[s] T T TMn 3Al 2Si 3O12 [s] α, BC2 α, BC2 α×, BC2 Fe 2SiO 4[s] α α α×

CaMgSi 2O6[s] αB αB αB

Ca 5P3O12 F[s] αB αB αB

CaAl 2Si 2O8[s] αB αB αB

NaAlSi 3O8[s] αB αB αB

Notes: Existence of a crust species at a certain temperature is indicated with which atmospheric type(s) the condensate exists. Lowercase text in Class II indicates under which atmospheric type the condensate has also appeared depending on the elemental input composition. The transitional class of atmospheric compositions between types C and B (500 K, 600 K), and types α and B (700 K, 800 K, 900 K, 1000 K), is referred to as T. 

⊗: CaSO 4[s] only exists in crusts contacting type BC2 atmospheres, if S /(C + H + O + S ) is greater than 0.6%. 

⊙: MgSiO 3[s] is only present in a subregion of crusts contacting type α

△: CaSO 4[s] only exists in crusts contacting type BC2 atmospheres, if S /(C + H + O + S ) is greater than 6%. 

▽: Na 2SO 4[s] only exists in crusts contacting BC2 atmospheres, if S /(C + H + O + S ) ≥ 0.14. 

∗: MgF 2[s] is present above ( O − H)/(O + H) = 0.9. 

†: KAlSi 3O8[s] is not present in 25 out of 61701 total model crust-atmosphere pairs from 800 K to 1000 K. These outliers have the atmospheric type BC2. 

‡: In model grids based on the Earth set of total element abundances, FeS[s] only exists in a subset of type α contacting crusts. 

×: These condensates do not exist in crusts contacting the most reducing part of type α