Title: Toward a unified framework for helium observations and interpretation of atmospheric escape

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.10707v1

Published Time: Wed, 12 Aug 2026 00:52:14 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. aa61537-26 ©ESO 2026 August 12, 2026 

# Toward a unified framework for helium observations and interpretation of atmospheric escape. 

Yann Carteret 1 & Vincent Bourrier 1

Observatoire Astronomique de l’Université de Genève, Chemin Pegasi 51b, CH-1290 Versoix, Switzerland Accepted to A&A 

ABSTRACT 

Atmospheric escape is considered a key process in shaping exoplanet demographics and evolution. The near-infrared metastable he-lium triplet (He i at ∼ 10833 Å) is one of the most powerful tracers of hydrodynamical outflows. In recent years, a large variety of instruments have been used to detect and characterize expanding upper atmospheres. High-resolution (HR) spectrographs, which can spectrally resolve the lines of the triplet, have been mostly used to probe the dynamics of atmospheric escape. More recently, JWST (low-resolution, LR) detected extended outflows that were missed by previous ground-based observations due to night-length con-straints. Since the observed transmission spectrum is computed from the ratio of stellar spectra degraded by instrumental convolution, we demonstrate that directly convolving a theoretical transmission spectrum with the instrument’s profile leads to inference biases as resolution decreases. This conclusion is particularly important for atmospheric escape studies but also holds in the more general context of LR atmospheric retrievals. Following the proper comparison methodology, we then investigated the complementarity of HR and LR observations for atmospheric escape measurements, comparing the capability of three instruments (NIRPS, JWST /NIRSpec, and JWST /NIRISS) to detect and characterize outflows. We find that NIRPS and JWST /NIRISS are mostly sensitive to the same he-lium signatures, while JWST /NIRSpec improves the detection limit of excess absorption for faint targets. Studying di ff erent outflow configurations, we show that LR space-based measurements cannot be used to infer the dynamics of the upper atmosphere close to the planet, and are best employed to measure the spatial extent of outflowing tails. We thus highlight the complementarity between HR and LR observations of atmospheric escape, the latter improving baseline reconstruction. 

Key words. Planets and satellites: atmospheres – Methods: numerical – Techniques: spectroscopic – Planets and satellites: individual: WASP-69 b 

1. Introduction 

Since the discovery of the first exoplanet atmosphere (Charbon-neau et al. 2002), the field has evolved toward in-depth character-ization of molecular composition and dynamics of atmospheres. The extraction of atmospheric transmission spectra relies on the comparison between the in-transit (planet-contaminated) and out-of-transit (unadulterated) stellar spectra averaged outside of the planetary transit, referred to as the baseline. Observa-tions are either performed at high spectral resolution (HR; R >

20 000), only accessible from ground-based spectrographs (e.g. CARMENES Quirrenbach et al. 2016, ESPRESSO Pepe et al. 2021, NIRPS Bouchy et al. 2025), or medium (2 000 < R <

20 000) and low spectral resolution (LR; R < 2 000), mostly achieved by space-based instruments (e.g. HST Holtzman et al. 1995, JWST Beichman et al. 2014). These two observing strate-gies are usually complementary, as they probe di ff erent lay-ers of the atmosphere. Indeed, HR observations are sensitive to cores of atomic and ionic lines, tracing the uppermost lay-ers, where molecules are mostly dissociated. Conversely, LR spectroscopy detects mostly molecular bands and the wings of these lines, formed at higher pressures, and thus deeper within the atmosphere. These broadband features are less accessible from the ground (but still observable, see e.g. Rackham et al. 2017; Diamond-Lowe et al. 2018) due to the loss of flux calibra-tion in ground-based observations because of Earth’s atmosphere and telluric contamination. Nevertheless, HR observations en-able the detection of a broad range of species located in the up-per atmosphere, from escaping light elements such as hydrogen and helium (Lavie et al. 2017; Guilluy et al. 2023), to heavier metals (Hoeijmakers et al. 2018; Sing et al. 2019; Ehrenreich et al. 2020; Prinoth et al. 2023) and some molecules (Snellen et al. 2010; Birkby et al. 2013; Hood et al. 2024). Resolving the intrinsically narrow line cores of these species allows for a detailed study of atmospheric chemistry and dynamics (Seidel et al. 2025). On the other hand, LR observations enable the study of clouds, hazes, and molecular composition detected through broad spectral features (Lecavelier Des Etangs et al. 2008; Sing et al. 2016; Helling et al. 2020). Due to Earth’s atmospheric absorption, the first observations of atmospheric escape were only possible using space instru-ments through the Lyman-α line (Vidal-Madjar et al. 2003). These measurements mainly probed the exosphere, where inter-actions between atoms are sparse. The metastable helium triplet lines (He i, ∼ 10833 Å, Seager & Sasselov 2000; Oklopˇ ci´ c & Hirata 2018) later emerged as a powerful tracer of highly irradi-ated, expanding upper atmospheres (Allart et al. 2018; Nortmann et al. 2018). Since He i decays to its ground state within a few hours, it traces the hydrodynamical regime of the extended atmo-sphere where it can form, most often associated to the thermo-sphere. Located in the near-infrared, the triplet is readily acces-sible from the ground, observed using HR spectrographs which can spectrally resolve the individual lines or ultra-narrow band photometry (Vissapragada et al. 2020). More recently, the JWST has demonstrated that space-based LR observations of the triplet can not only yield new detections around small planets (Ahrer 

Article number, page 1 of 16 arXiv:2608.10707v1 [astro-ph.EP] 11 Aug 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26 

et al. 2025), but also estimate the outflow dynamics (Allart et al. 2025b). Despite being two distinct observing strategies, HR and LR observations of He i probe the same layers of the atmosphere and measurements can be compared. In this paper, we address the question of observing and interpreting atmospheric escape using the He i. With both HR and LR observations available and exploited by the community, it is essential to understand to which extent the two observing strategies are complementary, in order to optimize observing time and interpret them jointly. In particular, we compare the performance of LR and HR in-struments in detecting the He i. Furthermore, we discuss how models should be compared to LR and HR measurements to be properly interpreted and avoid any biases. In this study, we use the Near InfraRed Planet Searcher (NIRPS, Bouchy et al. 2017; Bouchy et al. 2025), and instruments of the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST): JWST /NIRSpec (Near-Infrared Spec-trograph) and JWST /NIRISS (Near-InfraRed Imager and Slitless Spectrograph) (Beichman et al. 2014); as representative of, re-spectively, HR and LR instruments, considering they are among the latest-generation instruments currently operating in this band pass. In Sect. 2, we describe the methodology employed to gener-ate synthetic observations throughout this paper. In Sect. 3, we focus on the biases induced by the current standard method to compute the absorption spectrum at both HR and LR. Sect. 4 compares the capabilities of HR and LR in detecting and char-acterizing atmospheric escape, in particular the geometry of the outflow and thermospheric properties. In Sect. 5, we study the choice of baseline for atmospheric escape observations. Finally, in Sect. 6 we summarize our findings and present our conclu-sions. 

2. Methodology 

In this section we describe our procedure to generate synthetic flux spectra during planetary transits, using the EvE code (Bour-rier & Lecavelier des Etangs 2013; Bourrier et al. 2015; Dethier & Bourrier 2023), and their associated error-bars. This proce-dure is common to all the sections of this paper. 

> 2.1. Stellar spectra simulations

The EvE code simulates an exoplanetary transit while account-ing for the geometrical e ff ects associated with its three dimen-sional (3D) nature. The star is described by a 2D regular square-cell grid, with each cell assigned a specific local spectrum. This approach accounts for inhomogeneities across the stellar sur-face and for the local occultation by the three di ff erent plane-tary regimes in EvE : the opaque layers which absorbs 100% of the stellar flux, the extended thermosphere in fluid regime, and the escaping exosphere with particle prescription. Based on the spectral profile associated with each stellar cell, and the optical depth of the planetary atmosphere computed along their line of sight to the Earth, EvE generates a time series of disk-integrated spectra at both high spectral resolution and temporal cadence. The code then convolves these spectra with the chosen instru-mental response and resamples them both temporally and spec-trally, so that they can be compared with observations (see De-thier & Bourrier 2023; Carteret et al. 2024, for more details). In this study, we use as a reference the hot-Saturn WASP-69 b, adopting its system parameters from Allart et al. (2025a). This bright system (J ∼ 8; Anderson et al. 2014) has been ex-tensively characterized through numerous observations of He i

at both low- (Vissapragada et al. 2020; Levine et al. 2024) and high-resolution (Nortmann et al. 2018; Allart et al. 2023; Guil-luy et al. 2024; Masson et al. 2024; Tyler et al. 2024), with one of the highest signal-to-noise ratio (S /N) among known exoplan-ets in the He i (∼ 65 reported in Allart et al. 2025a). Moreover, it was theoretically predicted to be the best system for atmospheric escape measurements in the He i band (Linssen et al. 2024). For these reasons, it is an ideal system for assessing instrument ca-pabilities and evaluating potential biases when comparing atmo-spheric escape observations with models. The stellar grid used in this work is tiled based on obser-vations from Allart et al. (2025a), accounting for the variations in local stellar spectra across the photosphere. Indeed, the disk-integrated spectrum is generally a poor proxy for local spectra, which vary along the transit chord and across the full stellar disk, resulting in planet-occulted line distortions (POLDs Dethier & Bourrier 2023) in classical transmission spectra. In particular, we account for the following POLD sources in our stellar grid: the Rossiter-McLaughlin e ff ect (RM; Rossiter 1924; McLaugh-lin 1924, induced by stellar rotation), center-to-limb variations (CLVs) of the line profiles (e.g., Vernazza et al. 1981), and varia-tions of the broadband continuum (limb darkening, LD; Knutson et al. 2007; Morello et al. 2017). Thermospheric profiles are generated using the p-winds 

(Dos Santos et al. 2022) code, adopting arbitrary parameters that roughly reproduce the amplitude of the observed signal in pre-vious studies. The H /He ratio is fixed at 90:10 1, and the exobase location depends on the thermosphere geometry (see Fig. C.1). The exosphere is described by a Monte Carlo particle simulation, initialized with the properties of the thermosphere at the exobase and shaped by the stellar XUV flux. Finally, the structure of the leading and trailing tails is assumed to be shaped to first order by gravity and approximated by tube-like structures. Their ge-ometry in the planetary rest frame is determined by free particle motion, for which we solve the 2D gravitational equations. The tails are thus parametrized by an escape velocity and an angle in the orbital plane between the perpendicular to the orbit and the tail axis. 

> 2.2. Mock observations

We simulate time series of flux spectra fin at high spectral and temporal resolution during a single transit. We convolve the time series of synthetic flux spectra with a Gaussian profile whose width is set by the resolving power R of the instrument. We consider in this study NIRPS and JWST, which are respectively representative of high-resolution (HR) ground-based and low-resolution (LR) space-based approaches to He i observations. For HR observations, we produce synthetic spectra as observed by NIRPS in HE mode ( R ∼ 75 000; pixel size ∆λ ∼ 0.036 Å). For LR we di ff erentiate between JWST /NIRSpec in the BOTS (Bright Object Time Series) mode, G140H grating, and F070LP filter (hereafter NIRSpec, R ∼ 2 050; ∆λ ∼ 2.39 Å) and JWST /NIRISS in SOSS (Single Object Slitless Spectroscopy) mode (hereafter NIRISS, R ∼ 650; ∆λ ∼ 9.38 Å near the he-lium triplet). The convolved time series is then resampled to the instrument’s wavelength grid. Finally, the absorption time series 

A is computed as the ratio of the in-transit spectral time series    

> 1While the shape of the metastable helium profile is a ff ected by this assumption, the general conclusions drawn across the paper does not depend on this choice. Article number, page 2 of 16 Yann Carteret & Vincent Bourrier: Comparing atmospheric escape He iobservations with models

to the unocculted stellar spectrum f⋆, processed identically: 

A(λ, t) = 1 − Rs

 GR ∗ fin (λ, t)

Rs

 GR ∗ f⋆(λ) , (1) where Rs is the resampling function and GR the Gaussian kernel. Throughout this paper, we work with a time-averaged ab-sorption spectrum and a He i light curve. The averaged absorp-tion spectrum is obtained by taking the temporal mean of the absorption time series between second and third contact, when the geometric planetary occultation is consistently full. To prop-erly isolate the atmospheric absorption, spectra are corrected for LD before averaging as detailed in Mounzer et al. (2022) and Dethier & Bourrier (2023). For NIRPS, prior to the computation of the average absorption spectrum, we resampled the flux time series into 5-minutes windows in order to match typical obser-vational strategy. On the other hand, the light curves are computed by inte-grating the flux over three wavelength ranges specific to each instrument (adjusted to the line spread function), reported in Ta-ble 1. We average the flux time series within 12-minutes bins for NIRPS (typical windows used for observations), while JWST is fixed to 5 minutes. This is motivated by the higher sensitivity of JWST compared to NIRPS, which ultimately allows for a bet-ter temporal sampling. We then integrate spectrally the excess absorption lc He (t) =

R A(λ, t) − (1 − lc white (t)) d λ

R dλ , (2) with lc white the broadband white light curve, as this traces more accurately the atmospheric contribution. When the integration is performed directly on the average excess absorption spectrum, we refer to it as the equivalent width (EW). The three spectral ranges used in this study correspond to the core, and the blue /red wings of the helium lines. At LR, we expect the absorption sig-nal in the wing ranges to originate from convolution broadening, whereas at HR it arises mainly from the projected dynamics of the outflow along the transit chord. The core range was thus se-lected based on previous observations to maximize the integrated helium signal. The set of mock observables is finally obtained by computing uncertainties on the averaged spectra and light curves, propagat-ing errors from the flux time series. Error-bars are computed for one transit of WASP-69 b, and then scaled to the J magnitude us-ing the S /N per second and the instrument exposure time texp as 

σ f (J) = σ f,W69 

S/NW69 

S/N1s(J) √texp 

. (3) For NIRPS, we use the S /N and error-bars from Allart et al. (2025a) as reference, provided for each exposure of the three observed transits of WASP-69 b. The errors for di ff erent J mag-nitudes are then estimated using the observational data from NIRPS GTO (Bouchy et al. 2025) to calibrate the S /N as a func-tion of magnitude. These uncertainties directly reflect the aver-age observational conditions, which is more realistic than esti-mates from the Exposure Time Calculator (ETC) for ground-based facilities (due to varying weather conditions). For both JWST instruments, we use Pandexo 2 (Batalha et al. 2017) to calculate the errors on the flux spectrum of WASP-69 b for one transit under the recommended observational strategy and the  

> 2Available online at Pandexo.

Table 1: Parameters associated with the three instruments of this study.                                            

> NIRPS NIRSpec /G140H NIRISS /SOSS
> R75 000 2 050 650
> ∆λ[Å] 0.036 2.39 9.38
> texp [s] 720 300 300
> λb[Å] [-2.03,-0.53] [-3.31,-0.92] [-10.75,-1.37]
> λc[Å] [-0.53,0.97] [-0.92,1.47] [-1.37,8.00]
> λr[Å] [0.97,2.47] [1.47,3.86] [8.00,17.38]
> ∆λlc [Å] 1.5 2.39 9.38
> Notes. Ris the resolving power, ∆λis the pixel size, texp is the exposure time of the simulated light curves, λb/c/ris the spectral integration range (centered on 10 833 Å) of the blue wing /core /red wing light curves, and ∆λlc is the spectral integration size of the light curves.

ETC 3 to compute the S /N as a function of the stellar J magni-tude. 

3. Absorption spectrum and instrumental convolution 

In this section, we explore the impact of the geometrical model assumed for the planetary orbit and atmosphere on the computed absorption spectrum. In particular, we compare the results given by a 1D prescription, commonly adopted in the literature, with a more advanced treatment including a 3D description of the orbit. We also assess the influence of the spectral convolution on the resulting absorption spectrum. 

3.1. Thermospheric parameters 

We generated synthetic observations at HR (NIRPS) and LR (NIRSpec) with EvE , as described in Sect. 2. The thermosphere is generated with p-winds at a temperature of 9750 K and a mass-loss rate of 10 12 g/s, roughly reproducing previous obser-vations (Allart et al. 2025a), and injected into EvE without in-cluding the exosphere. As a reminder, our modeling naturally includes RM, CLVs, and LD e ff ects in these synthetic obser-vations, as well as a 3D description of the planetary orbit and thermosphere. From the synthetic average absorption spectrum, we gener-ate a mock observation. Let us consider the number of photons 

Nγ, which is related to the spectrum in flux units by Nγ/σ Nγ =

S /N = f /σ f . We estimate the errros on the number of photons collected as σNγ = pNγ, with f and σ f known from EvE . Us-ing the number of photons computed from the EvE averaged flux spectrum, we draw a random realization from a Poisson distri-bution. Once converted back to flux values, this yields a new av-eraged absorption spectrum (and its associated error), randomly and conservatively reconstructed within the initial uncertainties. This represents one mock observation as seen by a given instru-ment under realistic observational conditions. We then generated a grid of p-winds models using its built-in the radiative transfer. The grid of models spans a wide pa-rameter space in temperature and mass-loss, with the H /He ratio and thermospheric radius fixed for simplicity (see Sect. 2). Since 

p-winds (and most atmospheric codes) does not incorporate the stellar flux in the computation of the averaged absorption spec-trum, we directly convolve and resample it (as commonly done   

> 3Available online at JWST ETC Article number, page 3 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26

in the literature), unlike the more accurate approach we advocate in Eq. 1. Finally, we generate a set of 10 000 mock observations from the EvE synthetic average absorption spectrum, and fit each of them with the p-winds grid, consistent with the common prac-tice in the literature (see e.g. Kirk et al. 2022; Allart et al. 2023; Vissapragada et al. 2024). We retain all parameter sets within 1 σ of the best fit, building a statistical distribution of the re-trieved parameters, which can be interpreted as the probability of retrieving a specific set of parameters given the underlying planetary atmospheric structure. We show these results in Fig. 1 for both NIRPS and NIRSpec. 

High-resolution with NIRPS: 

Fig. 1 shows a degeneracy in the parameter space at HR. This degeneracy is mostly driven by the thermospheric model alone, as di ff erent combinations of mass-loss and temperature result in similar density profiles. Moreover, the statistical fluctuations in the observed flux within each spectral, bin due to photon noise, propagate the measurement uncertainties into variations in the depth and width of the absorption spectrum, resulting in a con-fidence band whose width depends on the S /N. However, this cannot account for the observed distribution here, since the input parameter set ends up not being the one most frequently recov-ered. We should also keep in mind that we considered a system with high S /N for the absorption signal. At lower S /N, the im-pact of this deviation on the derived parameters would be less significant and more easily mistaken with noise. As shown in several previous HR studies (see e.g., Casasayas-Barris et al. 2020; Dethier & Bourrier 2023), stellar disk inhomogeneities can strongly impact the HR absorption fea-tures. Notably, in the more realistic synthetic spectra we gener-ated with EvE , the CLVs and RM induce POLDs along the transit chord. As a result, POLDs deform the absorption signature and, if left unmodeled, introduce a bias in the derived atmospheric parameters. Another important aspect is the 3D structure of the upper atmosphere implemented in EvE . Although we generated a purely 1D density profile with p-winds , it is projected into 3D. This allows us to account for the projected velocity field shifting the absorption feature. Not using a 3D description introduces a stronger bias for eccentric planets and large or complex atmo-spheres, whereas POLDs originate from the star and are stronger for fast rotators, cool host stars, and misaligned planets. Despite these e ff ects not being treated in p-winds , their impact on the atmospheric escape parameters is comparable to the HR instrumental uncertainties. As such, simplified radiative transfer approaches are su ffi cient as long as the relative precision on the absorption spectrum is not extremely high. However, for HR studies aiming for high precision, having high S /N on the absorption signal (i.e. strong absorption and /or high S /N on the stellar spectrum), or involving strong POLDs, we recommend using a more advanced radiative transfer model to properly iso-late the planetary features from the POLDs (see also Dethier & Tessore 2024, for a more general discussion). 

Low-resolution with JWST: 

In the lower panels of Fig. 1, we focus on LR with NIRSpec. Because of the broader instrumental kernel, absorption features become substantially shallower and wider, leading larger uncer-tainties in the retrieved parameters, as highlighted by the wider confidence band. This is naturally expected at LR, as the ab-sorption feature is diluted by the instrumental kernel and spread across only a few spectral bins that are wider than the intrinsic width of the triplet. Consequently, the absorption width at LR is mainly determined by the instrumental convolution kernel, and information about the shape of the intrinsic absorption profile is lost. The resulting degeneracy between the width and the height of the profile translates into a degeneracy between mass-loss rate and temperature. Furthermore, we note a stronger bias in the retrieved param-eters compared to NIRPS. Yet, we expect the impact of neglect-ing POLDs and the 3D atmospheric structure to decrease at LR, as they induce spectrally narrow variations in the transmission spectrum that are smoothed out similarly to the absorption sig-nal (Carteret et al. 2024). Moreover, for systems that are not strongly misaligned, Carteret et al. (2024) showed that the RM eff ect remains significantly below the observational uncertain-ties. Since the RM e ff ect dominates the POLDs contribution over CLVs (Yan et al. 2017; Casasayas-Barris et al. 2020; Dethier & Bourrier 2023), POLDs alone cannot explain the increased bias observed in the LR parameter space. In this section, we reproduced the approach used in most studies in the literature, using a simplified radiative transfer treat-ment in which the stellar spectrum is ignored and absorption signatures are assumed to directly represent the transmission spectrum. As a result, the modeled absorption spectrum is di-rectly convolved and resampled onto the observational spectral grid before being compared with the data. Yet, the transmission spectrum derived from the observations is computed as the ratio between the in-transit and out-of-transit flux spectra, according to Eq. 1. While convolution e ff ects are not a major concern at HR, since the instrumental kernel is narrower than typical stellar lines, they can lead to non-negligible di ff erences at lower reso-lutions. This explains why the input parameters are not correctly recovered. We further discuss the origin of this convolution bias in Appendix. A.1. Finally, we note that this conclusion is inde-pendent of the model used to compute the thermospheric density profile and originates only from the degradation of the absorp-tion spectrum at LR. 

> 3.2. Predicting high-resolution absorption amplitude

To further illustrate the convolution bias at LR, we use our syn-thetic JWST LR observations, computed with Eq. 1, to predict the amplitude of the corresponding absorption spectrum at HR. In this way, we provide a first-order, purely data-driven estimate of the expected HR signal amplitude. This is particularly use-ful for assessing the detectability, from ground-based facilities, of signals detected with the JWST (e.g. for sub-Neptunes, Ahrer et al. 2025) or to compare with previous HR observations. To this end, we approximate the HR absorption spectrum by a single Gaussian and compute mock NIRSpec observations using Eq. 1 and the stellar spectrum, adopting the same uncertainties as in the previous section. We refer to this absorption spectrum as the true JWST absorption. We then fit the true JWST absorption us-ing the HR Gaussian absorption profile after direct convolution and resampling (hereafter referred to as star-biased absorption), as is commonly done in the literature (e.g. Fournier-Tondreau et al. 2024; Piaulet-Ghorayeb et al. 2024; Radica et al. 2024; Al-lart et al. 2025b). As shown in the previous section, this approach is subject to the convolution bias because the stellar spectrum is not included in the computation of the LR model absorption spectrum. The true JWST mock absorption is generated assuming a peak absorption of 3% and a full width at half maximum (FWHM) set to 0.7 Å, typical values found in atmospheric es-cape studies. We further consider two stellar spectra, shown in Fig. A.3, that are representative of narrow and wide stellar 

> Article number, page 4 of 16

Yann Carteret & Vincent Bourrier: Comparing atmospheric escape He i observations with models 10831 10832 10833 10834 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 01234Absorption [%] 10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0 12.5 log 10 (mass loss rate) [g/s] 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 11000 12000 Temperature [K] 10826 10828 10830 10832 10834 10836 10838 10840 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Absorption [%] 10.5 11.0 11.5 12.0 12.5 log 10 (mass loss rate) [g/s] 6000 7000 8000 9000 10000 11000 12000 Temperature [K] 

> 10 °6
> 10 °5
> 10 °4
> 10 °3
> 10 °2
> Probability density
> HR (NIRPS)
> LR (NIRSPEC) LR (NIRSpec)

Fig. 1: Left panels: synthetic averaged absorption spectra for NIRPS (top) and NIRSpec (bottom) generated with EvE . The grayed area represents the 1 σ envelop of all accepted models within the p-winds grid. The 3 vertical black dashed lines correspond to the helium triplet rest wavelengths. Right panels: distribution of atmospheric parameters found from the p-winds fit for NIRPS (top) and NIRSpec (bottom). The white star denotes the input parameters used to generate the averaged absorption spectra on the left panels. lines. The first spectrum corresponds to WASP-69 and shows deep stellar absorption lines, whereas the second corresponds to WASP-121, an earlier-type star characterized by broader and shallower lines. We show in Fig. 2 the true JWST NIRSpec absorption spec-tra for the two stellar spectra. To further quantify this bias, we fixed the FWHM at its reference value in the fit to the two true NIRSpec spectra. We found the values A69 = 2.52 ± 0.09% and 

A121 = 2.93 ± 0.09% for the height of the Gaussian absorption spectrum, set originally to 3%. We immediately see that the star-biased approach introduces a significant deviation ( ∼ 4 σ at the peak) compared to the true JWST absorption spectrum gener-ated using WASP-69 stellar spectrum. Using the fitted values, this corresponds to a 16% relative deviation from the expected value, or ∼ 1.5σ for one NIRPS WASP-69 transit. We conclude that neglecting WASP-69 stellar spectrum significantly a ff ects the retrieved height of the signal at HR. However, when neglect-ing the WASP-121 spectrum, the bias is much smaller and the predicted amplitude remains consistent with the original value. We attribute this di ff erence in bias magnitude to the shape of the stellar lines near the triplet (see also Appendix. A.1). In particular, WASP-69 stellar lines are deep, whereas those of WASP-121 are shallower. For narrow and deep stellar lines, the LR convolution averages the varying stellar flux over a broad range. Planetary absorption reduces even more the stellar flux near the core of the line but the resulting relative di ff erence in flux is much lower for deep stellar lines. As a result, once con-volved, the in-transit flux is proportionally less reduced for deep and narrow stellar lines, and thus absorption features smaller than the instrumental kernel are reduced. Consequently, directly convolving the absorption spectrum leads to a significant over-estimation of the LR absorption in the case of deep stellar lines, compared to computing it from Eq. 1. This can lead to incon-sistencies between HR and LR absorption measurements, which could be wrongly attributed to variability in the atmospheric sig-nal (see also discussion in Dethier & Tessore 2024). We also note that for thermospheric layers close to the planet, where the gas is co-moving with the planetary bulk such that line broadening is dominated by thermal motions with typical temperature of a few 10 3 K, fixing the FWHM at ∼ 0.7 Åis a rea-sonable assumption. However, for outflows that extend further than a few planetary radii, the dynamical broadening (orbital mo-tion of the gas) becomes dominant as the gravitational binding to the planet weakens (see e.g. Bourrier et al. 2018; Zhang et al. 2023; Gully-Santiago et al. 2024). Another mechanism that can increase the FWHM is the saturation of the deepest atmospheric layers, creating broader wings than expected (see e.g. predicted spectra for various sub-Neptunes Allan & Vidotto 2025). In such cases, the absorption spectrum can broaden significantly (Huang et al. 2023; Czesla et al. 2024; Nail et al. 2025), and fixing the FWHM a priori can bias the derived HR amplitude (see also Ap-pendix B). 

3.3. Broadband molecular features 

We previously discussed the convolution bias in the specific con-text of spectrally localized absorption features. The JWST, and LR observations more generally, are primarily used to probe broadband molecular features in exoplanet atmospheres. We therefore also quantify the bias introduced by neglecting the stel-lar spectrum when computing molecular absorption spectra over 

Article number, page 5 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26 10826 10828 10830 10832 10834 10836 10838 10840 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 Absorption [%] 

> WASP-69 spectrum WASP-121 spectrum No stellar spectrum

Fig. 2: Absorption spectra at NIRSpec resolution. The blue and orange spectra are computed correctly using Eq 1, from two dif-ferent reference stars and a Gaussian high-resolution absorption with fixed FWHM of 0.7 Åand height of 3%. The black spec-trum is computed convolving directly the high-resolution Gaus-sian absorption, rather than using the ratio of the convolved in-and out-transit spectra (star-biased). a broad wavelength range. For this, we simulated with SCARLET 

(Benneke & Seager 2012, 2013) the transmission spectrum of WASP-69 b at R = 250 000, assuming a constant temperature profile and solar abundances. Then, we computed the LR absorp-tion spectrum as observed by NIRISS in three di ff erent ways: (REF) using the stellar spectrum and equation 1, (A) by di-rectly resampling the SCARLET absorption spectrum onto NIR-Spec wavelength table without convolution, and (B) by directly convolving and resampling the SCARLET absorption spectrum. To estimate the significance of these deviations with respect to typical uncertainties in the absorption spectrum, we also com-puted the error-bar level associated to one transit of WASP-69 b with NIRISS using Pandexo . Then, we derived two di ff erential transmission spectra, defined as the di ff erences between the in-correctly computed absorption spectra (A and B) and the cor-rectly computed one (REF). We show in Fig. 3 the two di ff eren-tial transmission spectra obtained for WASP-69 b. We find that applying only spectral resampling (A) leads to large deviations relative to the correctly computed JWST absorp-tion spectrum (REF). The amplitude of this deviation seems to increase with wavelength, which may be explained by the in-creasing NIRISS resolving power (see also Sect. 3.2). When we directly convolve and resample the absorption spectrum (B), we still observe some deviations but much smaller. Errors vary be-tween 50 and 250 ppm depending on wavelength. While the am-plitude of the bias exceeds uncertainties for the resampling alone (A), the resampling and convolution (B) bias remains much smaller. This contrasts with the previous section, where we ob-served deviations several times larger than the error-bars. We ex-plain this by the spectral width of the molecular features (which are a blend of many individual lines), larger than both the con-volution kernel and the stellar lines’ width, resulting in a much lower impact from the stellar spectrum than for individual lines (see also Appendix. A.1). We note, however, that depending on the stellar type 4, and amplitude of the absorption features, the bias level can vary and may become comparable to the error-bars. Based on our results, we strongly encourage LR retrieval frameworks to at least apply instrumental convolution, and ide-     

> 4See Fig. A.2 for the same computation with WASP-121 stellar spec-trum. 1.01.52.02.5
> Wavelength in μm
> −200
> −150
> −100
> −50 050 100 150 200
> Differential transmission in ppm  Rebin (A) Convolution + rebin (B)

Fig. 3: Di ff erential transmission spectra at NIRISS /SOSS res-olution. We subtracted the absorption spectrum computed with equation 1 to the direct resampling (brown) or convolu-tion +resampling (purple) of WASP-69 b simulated absorption spectrum. Error-bars for 1 NIRISS /SOSS transit vary between 50 and 250 ppm over the wavelength range (shaded area). ally to use Eq. 1 to correctly compute the model transmission spectrum while accounting for the stellar spectrum. Finally, as shown previously by Deming & Sheppard (2017), the spectral sampling of the stellar spectrum must be high enough to resolve properly all stellar lines in order to avoid any bias. 

4. High versus low-resolution escape detection and characterization 

In this section, we investigate and characterize the performance of HR and LR instruments in detecting and constraining atmo-spheric escape. Recently, the JWST has been used to detect at-mospheric escape through the He i line, mainly with the NIRISS instrument, as a secondary product of transit observations (e.g. Ahrer et al. 2025; Allart et al. 2025b; Fournier-Tondreau et al. 2025; Krishnamurthy et al. 2025). JWST also covers the He i

with the NIRSpec instrument, which has an intermediate resolu-tion between that of NIRISS and ground-based spectrographs. With these di ff erent LR and HR instruments available to the community, it becomes essential to characterize the capability of each of them to detect He i in order to guide future observing programs. 

4.1. Detection threshold 

We generated a typical absorption signature with p-winds , us-ing the WASP-69 b parameters. We then scaled the absorption spectrum so that the peak excess absorption reaches a set of desired value. We computed the mid-transit flux spectrum as-sociated with each of these model absorption spectra using the WASP-69 stellar spectrum, and used Eq. 1 to properly compute the observed absorption spectrum. Finally, we estimated error-bars as described in Sect. 2, assuming a single transit with a baseline equal in duration to the transit. We use the excess absorption EW and associated error as a proxy for He i detections. Indeed, the EW fully integrates the absorption signature, which ultimately allows for a cross-comparison between instruments, and represents a good estimate of the mass-loss (Ballabio & Owen 2025). However, because the       

> Article number, page 6 of 16 Yann Carteret & Vincent Bourrier: Comparing atmospheric escape He iobservations with models 6810 12 14
> J magnitude
> 10 °110 010 1
> Maximum of absorption  Amax  ABC

NIRSPEC/G140H     

> 6810 12 14
> J magnitude ABC

NIRISS/SOSS     

> 6810 12 14
> J magnitude ABC

NIRPS  

> 0.05 0.10.51510 EW /æ EW

NIRISS/SOSS  NIRPS NIRSpec/G140H 

Fig. 4: Detection maps of He i absorption for NIRISS /SOSS, NIRSpec /G140H, and NIRPS. The black lines denotes the 3 σ limit on S/NEW , and we highlighted 3 specific cases with letters for which the observed absorption spectra are displayed in Fig. D.1. The dashed line reported on each JWST maps is the NIRPS 3 σ threshold for comparison. On the NIRPS map we also show with the green, blue, and red arrows the J magnitude limit for 3 σ characterization of the local planetary continuum for a typical sub-Neptune, Neptune, and Jupiter sized planet. absorption needs to be computed from Eq. 1 and not by con-volving directly the absorption spectrum (we discuss this aspect further in Sect. 3) the EW is not comparable between the three instruments. As such, we adopt S /NEW = EW /σ EW as a natural criterion to assess He i detections, setting a detection threshold at S /NEW ≥ 3. The EW integration ranges depend on the re-solving power and are defined such that the entire absorption is covered. Furthermore, we considered that the continuum level, which originates from absorption by the planet opaque layers, is estimated locally around the He i lines. For HR we used a nor-malizing band of ∼ 10 Å to avoid high frequency contamina-tion from Earth’s atmosphere and systematic noise, whereas we used ∼ 150 Å for LR to correct for local molecular absorption. Uncertainties on the EW are propagated from the errors on the absorption spectrum and the locally evaluated continuum. We estimated the S /NEW of each instrument for di ff erent J magnitudes to create detection maps, shown in Fig. 4. These maps inform us of the level of absorption required to claim a detection as a function of the system brightness. Because the ab-sorption signature is significantly smoothed by the large convo-lution kernel of NIRISS, the S /NEW does not scale linearly with the sensitivity. In practice, both instruments detect essentially similar levels of absorption in the underlying spectrum, with the di ff erence remaining marginal despite the much higher precision of NIRISS compared to NIRPS. NIRSpec, on the other hand, appears to be a good trade-o ff between sensitivity and spectral resolution, improving detection levels especially for the faintest targets. We attribute the di ff erence between NIRISS and NIR-Spec to the presence of the stellar Si line near the He i (∼ 3 Å away). Due to its lower resolving power, NIRISS ( σR ∼ 7 Å near the triplet) fully blends the stellar Si and He i lines in contrast to NIRSpec ( σR ∼ 2 Å near the triplet). When we compute the true JWST absorption spectrum with Eq. 1, the blending of He i and Si in the flux spectra reduces the strength of the He i absorption. The two JWST maps also depends on the stellar spectral type (see also Sect. 3) which is further linked to the relative widths and depths of the Si and He i lines. We note also that these maps depend on the exact shape of the He i absorption profile, espe-cially its width, which remains fixed at ∼ 0.7 Å here. An increase in the width of the He absorption lines, which scales with the EW, will ultimately increase the S /NEW and lower the detection threshold, since the uncertainty on the EW depends primarily on the J magnitude (see Fig. B.2). However, this is system depen-dent, and the conclusions drawn here, based on the relative levels between instruments, remain valid. Finally, we highlighted three specific regimes on the maps, corresponding respectively to high absorption and high S /N (A), low absorption and high S /N (B), and high absorption and low S/N (C). These three cases are illustrated in Fig. D.1, where we display the synthetic absorption spectra generated with EvE as observed by each instrument. The NIRPS absorption spectra are very noisy for faint targets, or low amplitude absorption, mak-ing the features hard to distinguish from the noise. However, the maps show that NIRSpec allows clear detections for faint tar-gets that would be missed by NIRPS or NIRISS (case C). In Fig. 4, we further show on the NIRPS map three colored arrows representing the magnitude threshold above which the contin-uum is determined at significance < 3σ for typical sub-Neptune, Neptune, and Jupiter planets. We note that both JWST instru-ments reach this threshold for J magnitudes greater than 14 for all planets. This highlights that, although JWST benefits from a considerably larger collecting area than the ESO 3.6m tele-scope, the high spectral resolution of NIRPS compensates for this di ff erence in the case of narrow, localized features such as the He i. The two facilities therefore achieve comparable S /N on the helium integrated absorption, and thus yield similar detection thresholds. 

4.2. HR and LR thermosphere constraints 

In the previous section, we focused on the capability of each instrument to detect atmospheric escape signatures. We showed that NIRPS and NIRISS spectra become less sensitive for faint targets, resulting in weak detections of atmospheric escape sig-natures. In this section, we aim to identify which instrument pro-vides the most valuable information to characterize the upper expanding atmosphere. To this end, we generated a set of mock absorption spectra with p-winds using Eq. 1, varying tempera-ture and mass-loss to obtain specific values of amplitude ( Amax ), while ensuring that the FWHM is preserved. Finally, we com-     

> Article number, page 7 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26 6810 12 14
> J magnitude
> 0.51.02.55.07.5
> Maximum of absorption  Amax  ABC

NIRISS/SOSS     

> 6810 12 14
> J magnitude ABC

NIRSPEC/G140H  

> 0.00.51.01.52.0hDiNIRPS  / hDiJWST

NIRISS/SOSS  NIRSpec/G140H 

Fig. 5: Atmospheric escape fitting constraints maps for NIRISS /SOSS and NIRSpec /G140H with respect to NIRPS. We show in the maps the ratio of the ⟨D⟩ metric (Eq. 4) between NIRPS and a JWST instrument (NIRISS left and NIRSpec right). Red colors indicate regions where NIRPS performs better than JWST in constraining the mass-loss - temperature parameter space, while blue ones indicate the opposite. The black hash-lines report the non-detection parameter space derived in Fig. 4. Similarly to Fig. 4, we also highlighted with letters the 3 specific cases for which the observed absorption spectra are displayed in Fig. D.1. puted uncertainties for di ff erent J magnitudes as described in Sect. 2. We then fitted each mock absorption spectrum using 

p-winds to derive constraints on temperature and mass-loss rate for each of these mock spectra. Our goal is to determine which instrument yields the strongest constraints on the atmospheric escape structure, as inferred from the absorption spectrum, for di ff erent absorption amplitudes and J magnitudes. The choice of p-winds arises naturally, as it o ff ers a simplified but well-defined set of fitting parameters compared to 1D hydrodynam-ical codes (e.g. Caldiroli et al. 2021; Schulik & Booth 2023; Linssen et al. 2024) which are inherently less flexible. Never-theless, we emphasize that our approach remains generic and should not depend on the choice of the model, since our analysis relies on a cross-comparison between instruments. In order to evaluate the level of constraint provided by each instrument in the temperature - mass-loss parameter space, we computed the weighted average distance ⟨D⟩ to the input param-eters for each pair of ( Amax , J magnitude): 

⟨D⟩α,β =

Pi, j ωi, j(β)

q

( Ti−Tα 

> ∆T

)2 + ( log ˙ Mi−log ˙ Mα  

> ∆log ˙ M

)2

Pi, j ωi, j(β) , (4) where T and log ˙ M are sampled uniformly, α indexes a given 

Amax , β indexes a given level of errors on the absorption spec-trum, ∆T and ∆ log ˙ M are the ranges within which each param-eter is varied. Distances are weighted by the likelihood of their associated models: 

ωi, j(β) = exp ( − 12 χ(β)2). (5) The metric ⟨D⟩ naturally captures the statistics of the parame-ter space, yielding smaller values for more constraining fits. We note that this approach is in principle degenerate between preci-sion and accuracy, as a low precision but accurate or a precise but inaccurate fit could return the same ⟨D⟩. Furthermore, an in-trinsic degeneracy of the parameter space arises because mul-tiple combinations of temperature–mass-loss rate can produce nearly identical absorption spectra in p-winds (as discussed in Sect. 3.1). However, since we only add error-bars to the p-winds 

absorption spectra, the set of Tα, log ˙ Mα always minimizes the χ2

value. Consequently, the metric probes the intrinsic degeneracy of the parameter space for a given absorption signature, rather than the accuracy of the best fit. This e ff ect is system dependent and does not reflect the sensitivity of the instruments themselves. To mitigate this, we restrict our analysis to the ratio of the met-ric between two instruments, thereby filtering out the intrinsic parameter space degeneracy. In Fig. 5, we present the ratio between NIRPS and the two JWST instruments discussed throughout this paper. Red regions indicate where NIRPS provides stronger constraints than JWST, whereas blue regions indicate the opposite. It is worth noting that non-detections can still provide constraints on the temperature– mass-loss parameter space (Allart et al. 2023; Masson et al. 2024), and are therefore retained and reported in the figure. We find that NIRISS consistently provides weaker or equiva-lent constraints than NIRPS. This was expected, as convolving to LR smooths the absorption spectrum, leading to a degener-acy between width and amplitude. In our case, this translates to a mass-loss and temperature degeneracy which limits the pre-cision of NIRISS fits across the parameter space. As shown in the previous section, NIRISS increased sensitivity (compared to NIRPS) does not compensate for the blurred, and thus re-duced, absorption amplitude, nor does it mitigate the degener-acy of the parameter space. In contrast, we find that NIRSpec increased sensitivity and intermediate resolving power are su ffi -cient to better constrain the parameter space than NIRPS for faint targets. Notably, NIRPS outperforms both JWST instruments for J<11, while NIRSpec consistently provides tighter constraints than NIRISS over all magnitudes. Similarly to the previous section, we highlight three regimes of amplitude and S /N of absorption to further illustrate our con-clusions. Case C detection is achievable only with NIRSpec, whereas cases A and B can be probed by all instruments. In case A, NIRPS provides the best constraints, while case B yields com-parable performance across all instruments. We note, however, that a complete characterization of a system should also include   

> Article number, page 8 of 16 Yann Carteret & Vincent Bourrier: Comparing atmospheric escape He iobservations with models

the analysis of the light curve, as observations have shown that atmospheric escape can produce non-spherical thermospheres (Allart et al. 2025a; Krishnamurthy et al. 2025). As discussed in Sects. 4.3 & 5, JWST instruments are much more e ffi cient than ground-based facilities for probing extended and asymmet-ric outflows but do not allow for a detailed study of the outflow kinematics. Several He i detections have shown significant veloc-ity shifts (Masson et al. 2024; Orell-Miquel et al. 2024), which would not be resolved by JWST instruments. While it may not change the derived mass-loss rate by orders of magnitude, it does limit JWST’s capability to investigate underlying physical pro-cesses. We discuss these aspects further in the next section. 

> 4.3. Extended outflow characterization

In this section, we compare the performance of HR and LR for the characterization of extended outflows. To this end, we gen-erated four di ff erent outflows with EvE , as observed with NIRPS and JWST. We show in Fig. C.1 the four thermospheric shapes considered here, together with their respective exospheric con-tribution (see also Fig. C.2 for the simulated absorption time series). The first three models are based on MacLeod & Ok-lopˇ ci´ c (2022), who simulated hydrodynamical outflows interact-ing with the stellar wind, with each case representing an approx-imation of the planetary outflow confinement by stellar winds of di ff erent strengths: weak (W), medium (M), and strong (S). The associated thermospheres are populated using p-winds pro-files with the same set of parameters. In all cases, the exosphere launch distribution depends on the strength of the stellar wind, which a ff ects the global direction of the outflow. The last model approximates a massive Roche lobe overflow that forms dense streams (STR, MacLeod et al. 2025). The four simplified mod-els are motivated by simulations (Wang & Dai 2021; MacLeod et al. 2025) and recent observations (Zhang et al. 2023; Gully-Santiago et al. 2024; Allart et al. 2025a,b; Krishnamurthy et al. 2025) of hydrodynamic He i outflows extending far from the planet. We note that these typical outflow shapes may also be influenced by the sound speed, the temperature of the outflow, or tidal interactions with the host star (Nail et al. 2024, 2025; MacLeod et al. 2025) but our four models broadly cover the range of structures that can be observed. 

> 4.3.1. Averaged spectra

The most commonly used metric, especially in high-resolution atmospheric escape studies, is the absorption spectrum in the planetary rest frame averaged over the transit window. In Fig. 6, we show the averaged spectra associated with the studied instru-ments and four outflow scenarios. We normalized each absorp-tion spectrum by its maximum amplitude to focus on the rela-tive spectral features rather than their absolute levels that depend on the exact He i density profile. There are clear di ff erences be-tween outflows when observed at HR that reflect both the shape of the evaporating atmosphere and its specific dynamics. In the STR scenario, He i atoms are no longer gravitationally bound to the planet and thus do not follow its orbital motion, leading to strong blue (resp. red) shifts for the trailing (resp. leading) tail that are associated with two distinct peaks in the average absorp-tion spectrum. We note also that, for a highly extended thermo-sphere (M case), the wings of the helium triplet are substantially broader at HR because the thermosphere is so extended that dif-ferent regions have substantially di ff erent radial velocities (i.e. in projection along the LOS), enough to separate their absorption signatures. On the other hand, information about atmospheric dynamics at LR in JWST absorption spectra is limited due to spectral dilution and large pixel width. Thermal broadening of the thermospheric absorption signature is insu ffi cient to distin-guish between the three stellar-winds scenarios (W, M and S), while the STR scenario exhibits slight di ff erences in the relative amplitudes of the spectral bins surrounding the triplet. Overall, the HR average absorption spectrum contains more information about the upper atmospheric dynamics than its LR counterpart, as expected. While LR spectra can only provide order-of-magnitude estimates of the LOS velocity, HR observa-tions are crucial to properly study the dynamics of the upper at-mosphere. However, this information is limited by the fact that the average spectrum is typically built from observations taken during the optical transit, between the second and third contact, which may not be representative of outflows extending far from the planet with asymmetric geometries and velocity fields. As a result, combined observations at LR from space (to probe the spatial extension of the outflow) and at HR from the ground (to probe its dynamics) are required to properly characterize a He i

absorption time series. 

> 4.3.2. Light curves

We present in Fig. 7 the simulated excess light curves of He i

for the four di ff erent scenarios considered in this section. Each simulated light curve is shown alongside one realization of the observations, whose scatter is computed from the S /N as de-scribed in Sect. 2. The excess absorption observed in the NIRPS light curves is much stronger than in JWST observations due to spectral dilution caused by the instrumental convolution and re-sampling. However, ground-based observations face significant limitations such as the loss of the absolute flux level, limited observing windows due to night duration, and low temporal ca-dence. These constraints become particularly important for ex-tended absorption signatures, e.g. in the STR scenario the helium transit can last longer than the night duration. However, stitching together data taken on di ff erent nights, sometimes separated by several days (Zhang et al. 2023; Gully-Santiago et al. 2024), re-quires coordination and is sensitive to variations in stellar activ-ity level between nights. The most critical issue is the loss of the true flux baseline. In the context of atmospheric escape, absorp-tion may begin long before the optical transit and extend well af-ter. Combined with the low temporal cadence required to achieve su ffi cient S /N from the ground, potential telluric contamination or instrumental instabilities, this makes it particularly challeng-ing to identify the start and end of the helium absorption signal and to define an appropriate observing strategy that covers pre-and post-transit baselines (see also Sect. 5). This limited cadence also reduces the ability to detect short-timescale variability in the escaping atmosphere. In contrast, space-based instruments are not limited by the night duration and provide a much bet-ter baseline coverage. Furthermore, JWST light curves achieve a relative scatter comparable to that of NIRPS while maintain-ing a finer temporal sampling, which is crucial to reduce the un-certainty in the outflow extent, a key parameter to constrain the mass-loss. JWST has already demonstrated its value in revisiting known systems with new detections of pre- and post-transit ab-sorption features (e.g. Allart et al. 2025b; Krishnamurthy et al. 2025). Since LR observations allow for a better temporal sam-pling and time coverage than HR ones, they are essential for complementing HR observations to constrain the duration of ab-sorption, which in turn allows for a better characterization of the outflow extent. 

> Article number, page 9 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26 10831 10832 10833 10834 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Normalized absorption NIRPS Typical errorbar 10826 10830 10834 10838 Wavelength [ ˚ A] NIRSPEC/G140H Typical errorbar 10810 10820 10830 10840 10850 10860 Wavelength [ ˚ A] NIRISS/SOSS Typical errorbar 

NIRISS/SOSS NIRPS  NIRSpec/G140H 

Fig. 6: Simulated average absorption spectra in the planetary rest-frame for the four di ff erent outflows considered (the color code used is the same as in Fig. C.1), as observed with NIRPS ( R ∼ 75 000, left), JWST /NIRSpec ( R ∼ 2 050, middle) and JWST /NIRISS (R ∼ 650, right). The dots represent the centers of the instrumental spectral bins. In the NIRPS panel, black error-bars are shown for 3 NIRPS transits whereas the faded ones for a single one. The three black vertical lines show the positions of the helium triplet lines at rest. We highlighted on top of each panel the blue, red, and black regions which correspond to the spectral ranges used for the light curves computation (Fig. 7). 0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.000 0.002 0.004 0.006 0.008 Excess He light curve -2 -1 0 1 2Time from mid-transit [h] 0.000 0.001 0.002 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4Time from mid-transit [h] -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4Time from mid-transit [h] -5 -4 -3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 4 5Time from mid-transit [h] 

NIRPS 

NIRSpec/G140H 

NIRISS/SOSS 

Fig. 7: Simulated excess absorption light curves in the stellar rest-frame for the four di ff erent outflows considered, as observed with NIRPS ( R ∼ 75 000, top), JWST /NIRSpec ( R ∼ 2 050, middle) and JWST /NIRISS ( R ∼ 650, bottom). The solid lines indicate light curves built from the black spectral range in Fig. 6, where as blue /red dashed lines are built from the blue /red ranges of Table 1. The dots represent one random instance of observation for each cases. In the NIRPS panel, black error-bars are shown for 3 NIRPS transits whereas the faded ones for a single one. The three vertical lines show the first contact, mid-transit, and last contact times. The color code used for the light curves is the same as in Fig. C.1. 

5. Choice of baseline for atmospheric escape observations 

HR transmission spectroscopy relies mostly on the comparison between spectra collected during the transit phases and the unab-sorbed stellar spectrum, directly measured before and /or after the transit event. As pointed out in the previous section, in practice the identification of the baseline can be di ffi cult with ground-based facilities, especially in the context of atmospheric escape where absorption may last significantly beyond the expected op-tical transit (e.g. Lavie et al. 2017). Let us consider the true stellar spectrum given by F⋆ =Pni=0 Fi on a discretized stellar grid, where Fi stands for the local stellar spectra (see also Sect. 3). When the stellar disk is oc-culted, the local stellar flux received by the observer is given by Fobs ,i = Fie−τi , with τi the optical depth proportional to the 

Article number, page 10 of 16 Yann Carteret & Vincent Bourrier: Comparing atmospheric escape He i observations with models 

cross-section and column density of the occulting species. Note that τi → ∞ for optically thick regions such as the rocky core or deep atmospheric layers. In the most generic way, the observed spectrum at a time tobs is 

Fobs (tobs ) =

> n

X

> i=0

Fie−τi . (6) Now consider the stellar spectrum computed from observations, referred to as the master spectrum. If the baseline is improperly identified, then the master may be biased by absorption from the extended atmosphere. In a general case, and assuming constant exposure times, the master spectrum is given by 

Fmaster = 1

Nbexp 

X

> bexp

Fobs (tbexp ), (7) where the subscript bexp refers to the baseline exposures. In the case where the baseline is correct this equation reduces to F⋆.However, if absorption occurs during the baseline, then the mas-ter spectrum becomes contaminated, which creates a bias in the entire absorption time series. The measured absorption at time 

tobs is indeed given by 

A(tobs ) = 1 − Fobs (tobs )

Fmaster 

=

Ptbexp (Fobs (tbexp )/Nbexp ) − Fobs (tobs )

Ptbexp (Fobs (tbexp )/Nbexp )

=

Ptbexp (Pi Fie−τi(tbexp )/Nbexp ) − Pi Fie−τi(tobs )

Ptbexp (Pi Fie−τi(tbexp )/Nbexp )

=

Pi Fi(Ptbexp e−τi(tbexp )/Nbexp − e−τi(tobs ))

Pi Fi

Ptbexp (e−τi(tbexp )/Nbexp )

=

Pi Fi

 δi − e−τi(tobs )Pi Fiδi

(8) where all time sums are performed over the baseline and we de-fine the quantity δi = Ptbexp e−τi(tbexp )/Nbexp . If the baseline is well identified, then δi reduces to 1. However, if the baseline contains spectra where the outflow already absorbs the stellar flux, δi < 1which propagates through the entire absorption time series, bias-ing it. Because τi is wavelength dependent, the bias also changes with wavelength. To illustrate the strength of this e ff ect, we computed a bi-ased master spectrum in our four simulation setups presented in Sect. 4.3, by integrating the flux spectra over intervals from -3 to -2 hours and /or 2 to 3 hours, i.e. when the extended atmo-spheres is already transiting. In Fig. 8, we show the averaged ab-sorption spectra generated with the biased master spectra. In the fully spherical case, absorption occurs only within ±2 hours so we do not see any di ff erence with the true absorption spectrum. However, by looking at more extended upper atmospheres, we see that misidentifying the baseline underestimates the averaged absorption spectrum, as pointed out by equation 8. Moreover, the bias varies with the line of sight velocity of the upper atmo-sphere. As such, direct comparisons between models and obser-vations become more challenging, especially if we consider only the averaged absorption spectrum as a proxy. In practice, all the cases illustrated in Sect. 4.3 can be distin-guished using the light curves. However, the exact time at which absorption begins or ends is less straightforward to identify. Moreover, ground-based observations are limited by the night duration and the temporal sampling. These aspects make subtle variations or plateaus in the absorption harder to detect and easy to confuse with instrumental systematics or noise at HR. As an example, ground-based observations of the stream case would completely miss the stream structure if performed between -3 h and 3 h, a typical observation strategy for a transit duration of 2 hours. Thus, ground-based characterization of extended atmo-spheric escape requires the longest possible baseline coverage, especially for systems where streams or tails can be expected (see predictions from MacLeod et al. 2025). In this regard, con-temporaneous observations with JWST, and more generally with space-based facilities, are essential to properly isolate the plane-tary signature and extract mass-loss rates. 

6. Conclusions and Recommendations 

In this paper, we reviewed the di ff erent approaches to observ-ing atmospheric escape through He i. In particular, we simu-lated di ff erent outflow configurations and generated mock ob-servations for NIRPS, NIRSpec, and NIRISS. We discussed the strengths and weaknesses of ground- and space-based facilities in detecting and characterizing atmospheric escape. Finally, we illustrated how the choice of baseline can bias the absorption time series derived from the data. Our study shows the importance of properly accounting for the stellar contribution and instrumental response when compar-ing absorption models and observations. At HR, the stellar CLVs and RM can mimic absorption or emission features when not taken into account, which prevents us from isolating the plan-etary signal (Dethier & Bourrier 2023). Most models use the disk-integrated spectrum as a proxy for the local stellar spec-trum, neglecting the POLDs. We find that this slightly impacts the retrieved parameters of the upper atmosphere for our repre-sentative system WASP-69 b, but expect the bias from POLDs to increase for fast rotators and cooler host stars. At LR, Carteret et al. (2024) showed that POLDs do not bias the absorption in the helium band. On the other hand, we find that convolving the modeled absorption spectrum directly introduces a strong devi-ation when compared with LR measurements. The modeled ab-sorption at LR must be computed using the stellar spectrum, as indicated in Eq. 1. Based on our results, we recommend always applying the instrumental convolution to the modeled flux spec-tra time series, rather than to the modeled absorption, when com-paring models with observations, as implemented in EvE . This conclusion also applies to retrieval frameworks for broadband features. Our comparison between NIRPS, NIRSpec, and NIRISS highlights that HR instruments (NIRPS) generally outperform LR instruments (JWST) for characterizing atmospheric escape through He i. NIRPS and NIRISS have comparable detection thresholds, whereas NIRSpec provides slightly improved de-tectability, especially for faint targets. Furthermore, contrary to Dos Santos et al. (2023) we do not find that JWST instruments provide tighter (compared to ground-based spectrographs) con-straints on atmospheric escape parameters over a broad range of absorption amplitudes. We note however, that NIRSpec seems to perform better than NIRPS for faint targets. By analyzing di ff er-ent outflow configurations, we would like to emphasize that HR and LR (space-based) measurements are fully complementary for studying atmospheric escape, despite probing the same lay-ers. On the one hand, space-based LR instruments do not su ff er from telluric or night duration restriction, and allow for a better temporal sampling. This is particularly important to constrain more precisely the duration of absorption, allowing for a better 

> Article number, page 11 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26 10831 10832 10833 10834 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 0.00 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.00 Normalized absorption 10831 10832 10833 10834 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 10831 10832 10833 10834 Wavelength [ ˚ A] Master-out Pre-transit master-ref Post-transit master-ref Mixed master-ref 10831 10832 10833 10834 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 

W M S STR 

Fig. 8: Synthetic high-resolution average absorption spectra computed using various stellar reference spectra as observed with NIRPS ( R ∼ 75 000). All spectra are normalized by the peak of the absorption spectrum computed using the master-out (black) to help for comparison. characterization of the outflow extent. A misidentification of the extent can bias the stellar spectrum used as reference both at LR and HR, which in turn a ff ects the full absorption time series. On the other hand, HR observations are necessary to study the dy-namics of the upper atmosphere, as LR can only provide an esti-mate of the LOS velocity. We recommend that future observing surveys maximize simultaneous observations with space- and ground-based facilities. One aspect we that did not discuss here is the temporal variability of the absorption signal which could prevent a proper comparison between HR and LR observations when taken too long apart. 

Acknowledgements. This work has been carried out within the framework of the NCCR PlanetS supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation under grants 51NF40_182901 and 51NF40_205606. This project has received fund-ing from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (project S pice Dune , grant agreement No 947634). 

References 

Ahrer, E.-M., Radica, M., Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., et al. 2025, ApJ, 985, L10 Allan, A. P. & Vidotto, A. A. 2025, MNRAS, 539, 2144 Allart, R., Bourrier, V., Lovis, C., et al. 2018, Science, 362, 1384 Allart, R., Carteret, Y., Bourrier, V., et al. 2025a, A&A, 700, A7 Allart, R., Coulombe, L.-P., Carteret, Y., et al. 2025b, Nature Communications, 16, 10822 Allart, R., Lemée-Joliecoeur, P. B., Jaziri, A. Y., et al. 2023, A&A, 677, A164 Anderson, D. R., Collier Cameron, A., Delrez, L., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 445, 1114 Ballabio, G. & Owen, J. E. 2025, MNRAS, 537, 1305 Batalha, N. E., Mandell, A., Pontoppidan, K., et al. 2017, PASP, 129, 064501 Beichman, C., Benneke, B., Knutson, H., et al. 2014, PASP, 126, 1134 Benneke, B. & Seager, S. 2012, ApJ, 753, 100 Benneke, B. & Seager, S. 2013, ApJ, 778, 153 Birkby, J. L., de Kok, R. J., Brogi, M., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 436, L35 Bouchy, F., Doyon, R., Artigau, É., et al. 2017, The Messenger, 169, 21 Bouchy, F., Doyon, R., Pepe, F., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A10 Bourrier, V., Ehrenreich, D., & Lecavelier des Etangs, A. 2015, A&A, 582, A65 Bourrier, V. & Lecavelier des Etangs, A. 2013, A&A, 557, A124 Bourrier, V., Lecavelier des Etangs, A., Ehrenreich, D., et al. 2018, A&A, 620, A147 Caldiroli, A., Haardt, F., Gallo, E., et al. 2021, A&A, 655, A30 Carteret, Y., Bourrier, V., & Dethier, W. 2024, A&A, 683, A63 Casasayas-Barris, N., Pallé, E., Yan, F., et al. 2020, A&A, 635, A206 Charbonneau, D., Brown, T. M., Noyes, R. W., & Gilliland, R. L. 2002, ApJ, 568, 377 Czesla, S., Nail, F., Lavail, A., et al. 2024, A&A, 692, A230 Deming, D. & Sheppard, K. 2017, ApJ, 841, L3 Dethier, W. & Bourrier, V. 2023, A&A, 674, A86 Dethier, W. & Tessore, B. 2024, A&A, 688, L30 Diamond-Lowe, H., Berta-Thompson, Z., Charbonneau, D., & Kempton, E. M.-R. 2018, AJ, 156, 42 Dos Santos, L. A., Alam, M. K., Espinoza, N., & Vissapragada, S. 2023, AJ, 165, 244 Dos Santos, L. A., Vidotto, A. A., Vissapragada, S., et al. 2022, A&A, 659, A62 Ehrenreich, D., Lovis, C., Allart, R., et al. 2020, Nature, 580, 597 Fournier-Tondreau, M., MacDonald, R. J., Radica, M., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 528, 3354 Fournier-Tondreau, M., Pan, Y., Morel, K., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 539, 422 Guilluy, G., Bourrier, V., Jaziri, Y., et al. 2023, A&A, 676, A130 Guilluy, G., D’Arpa, M. C., Bonomo, A. S., et al. 2024, A&A, 686, A83 Gully-Santiago, M., Morley, C. V., Luna, J., et al. 2024, AJ, 167, 142 Helling, C., Kawashima, Y., Graham, V., et al. 2020, A&A, 641, A178 Hoeijmakers, H. J., Ehrenreich, D., Heng, K., et al. 2018, Nature, 560, 453 Holtzman, J. A., Hester, J. J., Casertano, S., et al. 1995, PASP, 107, 156 Hood, T., Debras, F., Moutou, C., et al. 2024, A&A, 687, A119 Huang, C., Koskinen, T., Lavvas, P., & Fossati, L. 2023, ApJ, 951, 123 Kirk, J., Dos Santos, L. A., López-Morales, M., et al. 2022, AJ, 164, 24 Knutson, H. A., Charbonneau, D., Noyes, R. W., Brown, T. M., & Gilliland, R. L. 2007, ApJ, 655, 564 Krishnamurthy, V., Carteret, Y., Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., et al. 2025, Nature As-tronomy [ arXiv:2505.20588 ]Lavie, B., Ehrenreich, D., Bourrier, V., et al. 2017, A&A, 605, L7 Lecavelier Des Etangs, A., Pont, F., Vidal-Madjar, A., & Sing, D. 2008, A&A, 481, L83 Levine, W. G., Vissapragada, S., Feinstein, A. D., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 65 Linssen, D., Shih, J., MacLeod, M., & Oklopˇ ci´ c, A. 2024, A&A, 688, A43 MacLeod, M. & Oklopˇ ci´ c, A. 2022, ApJ, 926, 226 MacLeod, M., Oklopˇ ci´ c, A., Nail, F., & Linssen, D. 2025, ApJ, 988, 63 Masson, A., Vinatier, S., Bézard, B., et al. 2024, A&A, 688, A179 McLaughlin, D. B. 1924, ApJ, 60, 22 Morello, G., Tsiaras, A., Howarth, I. D., & Homeier, D. 2017, AJ, 154, 111 Mounzer, D., Lovis, C., Seidel, J. V., et al. 2022, A&A, 668, A1 Nail, F., MacLeod, M., Oklopˇ ci´ c, A., et al. 2025, A&A, 695, A186 Nail, F., Oklopˇ ci´ c, A., & MacLeod, M. 2024, A&A, 684, A20 Nortmann, L., Pallé, E., Salz, M., et al. 2018, Science, 362, 1388 Oklopˇ ci´ c, A. & Hirata, C. M. 2018, ApJ, 855, L11 Orell-Miquel, J., Murgas, F., Pallé, E., et al. 2024, A&A, 689, A179 Pepe, F., Cristiani, S., Rebolo, R., et al. 2021, A&A, 645, A96 Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., Benneke, B., Radica, M., et al. 2024, ApJ, 974, L10 Plez, B. 2012, Astrophysics Source Code Library, ascl:1205.004, aDS Bibcode: 2012ascl.soft05004P Prinoth, B., Hoeijmakers, H. J., Pelletier, S., et al. 2023, A&A, 678, A182 Quirrenbach, A., Amado, P. J., Caballero, J. A., et al. 2016, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VI, ed. C. J. Evans, L. Simard, & H. Takami, 990812 Rackham, B., Espinoza, N., Apai, D., et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 151 Radica, M., Coulombe, L.-P., Taylor, J., et al. 2024, ApJ, 962, L20 Rossiter, R. A. 1924, ApJ, 60, 15 Schulik, M. & Booth, R. A. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 286 Seager, S. & Sasselov, D. D. 2000, ApJ, 537, 916 Seidel, J. V., Prinoth, B., Pino, L., et al. 2025, Nature, 639, 902 Sing, D. K., Fortney, J. J., Nikolov, N., et al. 2016, Nature, 529, 59 Sing, D. K., Lavvas, P., Ballester, G. E., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 91 Snellen, I. A. G., de Kok, R. J., de Mooij, E. J. W., & Albrecht, S. 2010, Nature, 465, 1049 Tyler, D., Petigura, E. A., Oklopˇ ci´ c, A., & David, T. J. 2024, ApJ, 960, 123 Vernazza, J. E., Avrett, E. H., & Loeser, R. 1981, ApJS, 45, 635 Vidal-Madjar, A., Lecavelier des Etangs, A., Désert, J.-M., et al. 2003, Nature, 422, 143 Vissapragada, S., Knutson, H. A., Jovanovic, N., et al. 2020, AJ, 159, 278 Vissapragada, S., McCreery, P., Dos Santos, L. A., et al. 2024, ApJ, 962, L19 Wang, L. & Dai, F. 2021, ApJ, 914, 99 Yan, F., Pallé, E., Fosbury, R. A. E., Petr-Gotzens, M. G., & Henning, T. 2017, A&A, 603, A73 Zhang, Z., Morley, C. V., Gully-Santiago, M., et al. 2023, Science Advances, 9, eadf8736 

Article number, page 12 of 16 Yann Carteret & Vincent Bourrier: Comparing atmospheric escape He i observations with models 

Appendix A: Convolution bias 

Appendix A.1: Simplified example 

In this appendix, we introduce a simple mathematical framework to illustrate how the order in which convolution is applied and the flux ratio is computed can bias the absorption spectrum. Let us consider planetary absorption lines ( Ap,n), stellar absorption lines ( A⋆, n), and fluxes in- and out-of-transit ( fin /out ,n) at the in-trinsic (i.e. infinitely high) resolution. To simplify the problem we assume the stellar surface to be homogeneous (neglecting POLDs), such that the local stellar intensity Ii is constant across the surface element S i:

fout ,n =

X

> i

IiS i ∼ IS ⋆ = Fcont (1 − A ⋆, n), (A.1) 

fin ,n =

X

> i

Ii(S i − S opaque − S pAp,n,i)

∼ IS ⋆

 1 − S opaque /S ⋆ − (S p/S ⋆)Ap,n



= Fcont (1 − A ⋆, n) 1 − S opaque /S ⋆ − (S p/S ⋆)Ap,n

, (A.2) where Fcont is the stellar continuum. Note that S p/S ⋆ is simply a geometrical factor and, since we arbitrarily fix the absorption amplitude, it can be absorbed into Ap,n for simplicity. We also set S opaque = 0, assuming absorption is dominated by the ex-tended atmosphere, and neglect spectral resampling. Using Gt

for the instrumental Gaussian kernel, absorption spectrum is then estimated as 

A = fout − fin 

fout 

,

= fout ,n ∗ Gt − fin ,n ∗ Gt

fout ,n ∗ Gt

,

= (1 − A ⋆, n) ∗ Gt −  (1 − A ⋆, n)(1 − A p,n) ∗ Gt

(1 − A ⋆, n) ∗ Gt

, (A.3) 

= (Ap,n ∗ Gt)1 − (A⋆, nAp,n)∗Gt

> Ap,n∗Gt

(1 − A ⋆, n) ∗ Gt

,

= (Ap,n ∗ Gt) κ. 

The advantage of this framework is that it explicitly relates the correctly computed observed absorption spectrum to the di-rect convolution of the native absorption spectrum. In this way, we can express the deviation introduced by the convolution sim-ply by evaluating the κ function, which depends on the plan-etary and stellar absorption profile and the instrumental kernel. Finally, we assume the planetary absorption lines, stellar absorp-tion lines, and instrumental kernel to be Gaussian. Formally, we have 

Ai(λ) = Ai exp   − 12σ2

> i

(λ − μi)2, (A.4) where the subscript i stands for planetary absorption ( p), stellar (⋆), or instrumental ( t) kernels. Note that by definition μt = 0, which is implicit for the rest of the section. Under the previous simplifications, and using properties of Gaussian and convolution, we get 

κ(λ) =

1 − Ar

> Ap
> σr
> σp

r σ2 

> p+σ2
> t
> σ2
> r+σ2
> t

exp 



− 12

  (λ−μr )2 

> σ2
> r+σ2
> t

− (λ−μp)2

> σ2
> p+σ2
> t



1 − A⋆ σ2

> ⋆

√σ2

> ⋆+σ2
> t

exp 



− 12

  (λ−μ⋆)2

> σ2
> ⋆+σ2
> t

 , (A.5) where we introduced σ2 

> r

= σ2

> ⋆

σ2

> p

/(σ2 

> ⋆

+ σ2

> p

), μr = (μ⋆σ2 

> p

+

μpσ2

> ⋆

)/(σ2 

> ⋆

+ σ2

> p

), and Ar = A⋆ Ap exp   − 0.5( μ⋆ − μp)2/(σ2 

> ⋆

+

σ2

> p

) that do not depend on instrumental kernel. This formula of κ depends on the position of the lines, their amplitudes, and their width. We can now approximate and compare κ in di ff erent regimes, shown in Fig. A.1 and discussed below. 

High-resolution: At HR, the width of the instrumental kernel is much smaller than the native absorption and stellar line. As such we have σt ≪ σp, σ ⋆ which leads to κ(λ) = 1. It follows that the stellar spectrum can be neglected in the computation of the absorption if POLDs are negligible. If that is not the case, as is generally true, the stellar spectrum is still required to accurately describe the local planetary absorption on the stellar disk. 

Broadband absorption: If we consider molecular features, sim-ilarly to Sect. 3.3, the forest of narrow and shallow lines can roughly be approximated by an absorption feature much broader than both the stellar lines or instrumental kernel. In this regime, 

σp ≫ σt, σ ⋆ and κ(λ) again converges to 1. This explains why the amplitude of the di ff erential transmission spectrum in Sect. 3.3 was smaller for molecular features than for localized absorption features (Sect. 3.2). 

Intermediate-resolution: In the case of He i absorption at NIR-Spec resolution we have roughly σp ∼ σt ∼ σ⋆. This time, κ(λ)does not simplify to 1, and depends on the relative position of the stellar and absorption lines. If we assume for simplicity μp = μ⋆,corresponding to mid-transit, and evaluate κ at λ = μp then we obtain 

κ(λ) = 1 − A⋆

√2/31 − A⋆/ √2 , (A.6) which depends on the depth of the stellar line. The maximum modeled absorption, computed by a direct convolution, can thus be overestimated by a factor of up to 1.6 ultimately biasing de-rived parameters. This also explains why the strength of the con-volution bias is reduced with shallower stellar lines (Fig. A.3), as illustrated in Sect. 3.2. 

Appendix A.2: WASP-121 spectra for broadband features 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5

Wavelength in μm

−200 

−150 

−100 

−50 050 100 150 200 

> Differential transmission in ppm

Rebin (A) Convolution + rebin (B) 

Fig. A.2: Same figure as Fig. 3 but using WASP-121 stellar spec-trum in Eq. 1 to compute the absorption spectra. 

Article number, page 13 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26 0.9975 1.0000 ¢μ = °4 ˚A¢μ = °2 ˚A¢μ = 0 ˚A¢μ = 2 ˚A¢μ = 4 ˚A0.995 1.000 10820 10825 10830 10835 10840 10845 

Wavelength in ˚ A

0.60.81.01.2

> ∑(∏) ratio
> HR
> Broad band
> Inter. resolution

Fig. A.1: Amplitude of κ computed from Eq. A.5 for the three regimes discussed. The dashed lines correspond to the posi-tion of μp and we define ∆μ = μ⋆ − μp. In all cases we fixed 

Ap = 0.02, A⋆ = 0.5, and σ⋆ = 2Å. Top panel: High-resolution regime where σp = 1Å and σt = 0.046Å which corresponds to 

R = 100 000. Middle panel: Broadband absorption regime where 

σp = 20Å and σt = 2.3Å which corresponds to R = 2 000. Bot-tom panel: Intermediate-resolution regime where σp = 1Å and 

σt = 2.3Å which corresponds to R = 2 000. 

Appendix A.3: Stellar spectra 10826 10828 10830 10832 10834 10836 10838 10840 Wavelength [ ˚ A] 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9 1.0 Normalized spectrum 

> WASP-69 spectrum WASP-121 spectrum

Fig. A.3: Normalized stellar spectra for the two stars consid-ered in Sect. 3.2. The two stellar spectra are generated using 

Turbospectrum (Plez 2012) 

Appendix B: Impact of the FWHM 

In this appendix, we illustrate the dependency of the predicted He i amplitude on the FWHM. As mentioned in Sect. 3.2, various processes can increase the FWHM of the He i absorption. Typi-0.50 0.75 1.00 1.25 1.50 1.75 FWHM in ˚ A1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 Absorption amplitude in % 

Fig. B.1: Relation between the predicted absorption amplitude and FWHM at HR from a synthetic NIRSpec observation (or-ange line in Fig. 2). The black star denotes the initial parame-ters used to generate the NIRPSEC observation. The shaded area shows the full envelop of retrieved parameters, whereas error-bars indicate 1 − σ dispersion. cally, for sub-Neptunes or extended outflows, the FWHM might deviate significantly from the commonly assumed ∼ 0.7 Å. We ran a retrieval similar to that performed in Sect. 3.2, but relax-ing the assumption on the FWHM. As a reminder, we gener-ated a mock observation at NIRSpec resolution using the WASP-69 stellar spectrum and Eq. 1. The mock absorption assumes a peak absorption of 3% and a FWHM of 0.7 Å. In contrast to Sect. 3.2, we fit the mock observation using the stellar spectrum as described in Eq. 1, avoiding the convolution bias. We show in Fig. B.1 the relation between the predicted FWHM and ampli-tude of HR absorption from LR observations. In particular, this illustrates that the predicted HR signal amplitude can vary by up to a factor of 5, depending on the assumed FWHM. While this should not strongly impact the threshold for detection (as argued in Sect. 4.1) this can significantly a ff ect the in-depth characteri-zation, typically preventing the study of dynamics. Finally, to further illustrate how the choice of the FWHM impacts our results, we reproduced Fig. 4 using the sub-Neptune GJ3090 b as the reference system in Fig. B.2. The FWHM of the p-winds absorption spectrum is ∼ 1.0 Å, which is broader than that of WASP-69 b. This illustrates that our detection limits should not be taken directly but that the comparison between instruments remains valid for a broad range of planets. 

Appendix C: Outflows structure 

In this appendix, we present the four scenarios simulated in Sect. 4.3. Fig. C.1 shows top views of the thermosphere for each scenario, together with the exospheric particles. In Fig. C.2, we display the excess absorption maps at the native resolution of the simulation. These maps are then resampled temporally and con-volved with the di ff erent instrumental profiles to generate mock observations. 

Appendix D: Absorption spectra in different S/N regimes 

> Article number, page 14 of 16

Yann Carteret & Vincent Bourrier: Comparing atmospheric escape He i observations with models 6 8 10 12 14 

J magnitude 

10 °110 010 1

> Maximum of absorption  Amax  ABC

NIRSPEC/G140H 

6 8 10 12 14 

J magnitude ABCNIRISS/SOSS 

6 8 10 12 14 

J magnitude ABCNIRPS 

0.05 0.10.51510 EW /æ EW 

NIRISS/SOSS  NIRPS NIRSpec/G140H 

Fig. B.2: Same figure as Fig. 4 but using the typical sub-Neptune GJ3090 b as reference system. -10 0Distance [R pl ]-30 -20 -10 0Distance [R pl ]              

> Weak
> -20 -10 010 Distance [R pl ]
> Medium
> -30 -20 -10 0Distance [R pl ]
> Strong
> -40 -30 -20 -10 010 20 30 40 Distance [R pl ]-10 010 Distance [R pl ]
> Stream

Fig. C.1: Top view of the 4 outflow scenarios considered in Sect. 4.3. The sky-blue dots represents particle of the exosphere, while the continuous color-map scales with the surface density of He i. In the top 3 cases the same thermospheric profile is used. In each panel, the red line shows the planetary orbit, the black dot denotes the opaque body, the dashed black line marks the exobase, and the orange dashed line is the Roche lobe. Note that the color code used for each outflow cases is the same throughout the paper. 

Article number, page 15 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa61537-26 

Fig. C.2: Excess absorption maps of the 4 outflow scenarios considered in Sect. 4.3. The color code used for the frames is the same as in Fig. C.1. Wavelength in ˚ A0500 1000 1500 

> Absorption in ppm

NIRSPEC/G140H Wavelength in ˚ A02000 4000 

> Absorption in ppm

NIRISS/SOSS Wavelength in ˚ A024

> Absorption in  %

NIRPS Wavelength in ˚ A         

> °100 0100 200 300
> Absorption in ppm Wavelength in ˚ A0500 1000
> Absorption in ppm Wavelength in ˚ A
> °101
> Absorption in  %10800 10820 10840 10860
> Wavelength in ˚ A01000 2000
> Absorption in ppm
> 10810 10820 10830 10840 10850
> Wavelength in ˚ A02000 4000 6000
> Absorption in ppm
> 10831 10833 10835
> Wavelength in ˚ A
> °2.50.02.55.07.5
> Absorption in  %

C

B

A

NIRISS/SOSS  NIRPS NIRSpec/G140H 

Fig. D.1: Simulated average absorption spectra in the planetary rest-frame as observed with JWST /NIRISS ( R ∼ 650, left), JWST /NIRSpec ( R ∼ 2 050, middle), and NIRPS ( R ∼ 75 000, right). The case A (upper panel) corresponds to high absorp-tion amplitude and S /N, case B (middle panel) to low absorption amplitude and high S /N, and case C to high absorption amplitude and low S /N (see also Figs. 4 & 5). 

Article number, page 16 of 16