Title: M Dwarf Singles and Multis Have Dissimilar Metallicities Indicating Different Origins

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.27013v1

Published Time: Thu, 24 Sep 2026 00:12:29 GMT

Number of Pages: 19

Markdown Content:
> Draft version September 24, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631

M Dwarf Singles and Multis Have Dissimilar Metallicities Indicating Different Origins 

Aida Behmard, 1, 2, ∗ Sheila Sagear, 1 Yuxi(Lucy) Lu, 3, 4 Romy Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez, 5 Adrian M. Price-Whelan, 1

and Soichiro Hattori 6, 2   

> 1Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, 162 Fifth Ave, New York, NY 10010, USA
> 2American Museum of Natural History, 200 Central Park West, Manhattan, NY 10024, USA
> 3Department of Astronomy, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 140 W 18th Ave., OH 43210, USA
> 4Center for Cosmology and Astroparticle Physics, The Ohio State University, 191 W. Woodruff Ave., Columbus, OH 43210, USA
> 5Center for Astrophysics |Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
> 6Department of Astronomy, Columbia University, 538 West 120th Street, Pupin Hall, New York, NY 10027, USA

ABSTRACT It is unclear if host star metallicities differ between systems with one detected transiting planet (“singles”) or multiple detected transiting planets (“multis”) around FGK dwarfs. Here, we find strong evidence that they do for M dwarfs. We use a homogeneous sample of FGK and M dwarf chemical abundances to demonstrate that M dwarf multis are significantly more metal-poor than singles ( p =0.00079), even when we only consider small ( <4 R⊕) planets ( p = 0.0013). This result emerges at the late-K to M dwarf transition. We observe that M dwarf multis become more metal-poor as a function of increasing planet multiplicity. Additionally, planets in singles have significantly higher eccentricities and shorter orbital periods compared to planets in multis. We interpret these findings as evidence that M dwarf singles lead relatively active dynamical lives, and the different planetary architectures of singles and multis arise from distinct dynamics influenced by metallicity. This may not occur in FGK systems because their more massive protoplanetary disks may supply enough planet-forming material to instigate dynamics that lead to only one transiting planet, even when the host star metallicity is low. Another possibility is that multis are less compact around FGK dwarfs because they form from larger disks, which may often cause them to be observed as singles in transit data. 

1. INTRODUCTION Our growing exoplanet census has revealed two dis-tinct architecture types in the region near the host star: systems with one known planet, or multiple planets. The NASA Kepler mission provided the first large influx of multi-planet discoveries (e.g., Fabrycky et al. 2014). These Kepler multi-planet systems are likely coplanar because they all transit their host star (“multis”). This is backed by planet population models which deduce that mutual inclinations of <3◦ between planets in mul-tis are consistent with the Kepler yield (e.g., Lissauer et al. 2011). However, the best-fitting models under-predict the number of systems with single transiting planet detections (“singles”) by a factor of three (Lis-sauer et al. 2011; Hansen & Murray 2013). This appar-ent excess of single-planet systems in the Kepler census is often referred to as the “ Kepler dichotomy”. Its un-derlying cause is not understood, and raises the question  

> ∗Flatiron Research Fellow

of whether singles and multis stem from the same under-lying population. That is, do singles belong to the tail of one underlying distribution that includes multis, or do they belong to a separate population with different formation conditions and/or dynamical histories? To investigate the source of the Kepler dichotomy, many studies have examined potential differences in planet and host star properties between singles and mul-tis. Most have been restricted to systems around FGK dwarfs. Several studies report differences in orbital ar-chitectures that suggest singles experience more dynam-ically volatile histories. For example, Morton & Winn (2014) found that singles host planets with higher obliq-uities compared to planets in multis. Limbach & Turner (2015) examined the orbital eccentricities of planets detected with radial velocity (RV) measurements, and found that eccentricities decrease with planet multiplic-ity. Similarly, Xie et al. (2016) and Van Eylen et al. (2019) report that singles have significantly higher ec-centricities compared to multis. Latham et al. (2011) found differences in planet size, with higher occurrence arXiv:2609.27013v1 [astro-ph.EP] 22 Sep 2026 2 Behmard et al. 

of small sub-Neptunes in multis (86 +2 

> −5

%) as opposed to singles (69 +2 

> −3

%). They interpreted this as evidence that singles more commonly host large planets that disrupt or inhibit formation of coplanar planetary architectures. This is in accordance with Brewer et al. (2018) who found that compact multis are more common around metal-poor hosts (which are less likely to host giant planets as expected from the planet-metallicity corre-lation). However, Romero-Mirza & Kempton (2018) re-port no significant differences in host star metallicity between singles and multis around FGK dwarfs. Larger samples analyzed by Weiss et al. (2018) also do not ex-hibit differences host star metallicity, or any other host star properties tested ( M∗ or v sin i). These results were interpreted by Weiss et al. (2018) as evidence that sin-gles and multis around FGK dwarfs belong to the same underlying population. Like FGK dwarfs, M dwarfs also host an excess of singles that point to the Kepler dichotomy (Ballard & Johnson 2016). Understanding its source in M dwarf systems is of particular interest; M dwarfs are the most common type of star in the Galaxy (composing ∼75% of stars in the solar neighborhood; Henry et al. 2006), have a higher small planet occurrence rate compared to FGK dwarfs (e.g., Howard et al. 2012; Mulders et al. 2015; Ment & Charbonneau 2023), and typically host compact ( P < 20 days) multi-planet systems of small worlds (e.g, Dressing & Charbonneau 2015; Hardegree-Ullman et al. 2019). A few studies report evidence of chemical differences between M dwarfs that host singles versus multis. Anderson et al. (2021) used parallaxes and photometry to derive metallicity proxies for K- and M-dwarf planet hosts, and found tentative evidence ( p

= 0.015) that compact multis are more metal-poor than singles. Following that, Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. (2023) was the first study to uncover strong evidence that M dwarf multis are relatively metal-poor using a sample of heterogeneous spectroscopic metallicities ( p = 0.001). Wanderley et al. (2025a) report the same result with a small ( <50 systems) sample of multis and singles around M dwarfs with homogeneous metallicities ( p = 0.002). This suggests that differences in M dwarf chemistry lead to the distinct planetary architectures that characterize singles versus multis. To definitively demonstrate that M dwarf singles and multis differ in host star chemistry, we require a large and homogeneous sample of M dwarf metallicities. Here, we use a data-driven method ( Lux , Horta et al. 2025) to derive chemical abundances for M dwarfs with Milky Way Mapper (MWM) data from the current phase of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS-V; Kollmeier et al. 2017). We describe our planet sample in Section 2, and how we derived chemical abundances for their M dwarf hosts in Section 3. In Section 4, we examine the metal-licities of our M dwarf singles and multis, and compare to FGK systems. We investigate if the metallicity differ-ence is reflected in other host star or planet properties in Sections 5 and 6, respectively. Finally, we discuss these findings and their implications for distinct dynamical pathways in singles and multis in Section 7.  

> 2.

THE PLANET SAMPLE We select a sample of transiting single- and multi-planet systems around cool ( <4500 K) stars from the NASA Exoplanet Archive 1 (Christiansen et al. 2025). We focus on <4500 K stars because stellar models strug-gle to provide reliable chemical abundances within this temperature regime (e.g., Brewer et al. 2016), making it a relatively unexplored parameter space to investigate with our data-driven abundance model. Thus, we in-clude both M and late-K dwarfs in our initial sample. To only retain M and late-K dwarf systems, we apply type-color sequence relations from Pecaut & Mamajek (2013): 

G − RP > 0.7

G + 5log( ϖ/ 100) > 6.53 (1) where G and RP are photometric passbands and ϖ is the parallax, all from Gaia DR3 (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023a). We then apply a <4500 K cut on host star temperatures from the Exoplanet Archive as well to remove any mid-K dwarfs from our sample. We do this because while the Pecaut & Mamajek (2013) cri-teria enable us to make an initial homogeneous cut on stellar type, the Exoplanet Archive temperatures, while heterogeneous, are likely more accurate for each single system because most are determined spectroscopically. This results in 370 singles, and 248 planets within 97 multis around M and late-K dwarfs. Next, we define a smaller sample that includes ob-servations from the Apache Point Observatory Galactic Evolution Experiment (APOGEE; Majewski et al. 2017; Wilson et al. 2019; Almeida et al. 2023) spectrographs. The APOGEE survey is part of SDSS-V/MWM, which we describe further in Section 3.2. These observations are needed for inferring late-K and M dwarf chemical abundances with our data-driven framework. We cross-match our full planet sample with the latest SDSS-V data release (DR19), but do not impose the <4500 K cut on host star temperatures from the Exoplanet Archive.  

> 1https://exoplanetarchive.ipac.caltech.edu/, queried 5/21/2026

3Instead, we apply a <4500 K cut using stellar tempera-tures from the APOGEE Stellar Parameter and Chemi-cal Abundances Pipeline (ASPCAP; Garc´ ıa P´ erez et al. 2016; SDSS Collaboration et al. 2025), which are homo-geneously derived from APOGEE spectra and consid-ered reliable in the late-K and M dwarf regime (Souto et al. 2022). We also impose a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) cut of >50/pix. This leaves us with 137 sin-gles, and 125 planets within 48 multis. Throughout this study, we predominantly work with systems only hosted by M dwarfs, which comprise 90 singles and 83 planets within 32 multis.  

> 3.

HOST STAR CHEMICAL ABUNDANCES To robustly investigate differences in chemistry for late-K and M dwarf hosts of singles versus multis, we require a large sample of homogeneously derived stellar chemical abundances. This is challenging because stars with <4500 K temperatures are cool enough to harbor molecules in their atmospheres, which create dense clus-ters of molecular lines in the optical and near-infrared regions of spectra that stellar models struggle to repro-duce (e.g., Allard et al. 1997; Rojas-Ayala et al. 2012; Mann et al. 2013). Several studies have modified spec-tral line lists and atmosphere fitting methodologies to more accurately capture late-K and M dwarf chemistry (e.g., Souto et al. 2022; Hejazi et al. 2024; Melo et al. 2024; Wanderley et al. 2025a). However, these cus-tomized modeling routines are computationally expen-sive and have only been used to characterize small stellar samples ( ∼50 stars; Wanderley et al. 2025a) with high-resolution spectra to date. Alternatively, we can employ data-driven approaches that do not rely on physical stellar models. Data-driven methods are fast compared to traditional stellar atmo-sphere modeling, and are thus well-suited to character-izing large stellar samples. One notable example is The Cannon (Ness et al. 2015; Casey et al. 2016), which uses a training set of stellar spectra with well-determined “labels” (e.g., stellar parameters, chemical abundances) to construct a predictive model of the flux at every pixel in the wavelength range of the spectra. The Can-non has been successfully used to characterize M dwarf spectra and infer a wide range of chemical abundances (Behmard et al. 2019; Birky et al. 2020; Galgano et al. 2020; Rains et al. 2024; Behmard et al. 2023). Here, we employ a similar model ( Lux ; Horta et al. 2025) that infers labels from stellar spectra via latent representa-tions (making it more flexible compared to The Can-non ). Lux improves upon limitations in previous data-driven/machine learning frameworks (e.g., Ness et al. 2015; Ting et al. 2019; Andrae et al. 2023; Guiglion et al. 2024; Li et al. 2024); it can account for uncertainties in the training set labels, and train models using partially-labeled data (e.g., stars that have Teff information but no [Fe/H]). 3.1. Lux Model Lux is a generative model of stellar spectra and labels. In its fiducial implementation, Lux uses linear transfor-mations to compute model-predicted label and spectral flux values, where the labels are generated as 

ℓn = A zn + noise (2) where ℓn is a vector containing the labels, zn is a vec-tor containing the latent parameters, and A is a matrix that projects the latent vector onto the stellar labels for the nth star. Similarly, the spectral flux values are generated as 

f n = B zn + noise (3) where f n represents the flux vector for the nth star. We assume the noise to be Gaussian with known variances. This allows us to express the likelihood of the stellar labels as 

p(ℓn|A, zn) = N (ℓn|A zn, σ 2

> ℓ,n

) (4) where σℓ,n represents the uncertainties on labels for each 

nth star, which are in this case the reported uncertain-ties on stellar parameters and abundances from ASP-CAP. The likelihood for spectral fluxes can similarly be represented as 

p(f n|B, zn, sf ) = N (f n|B zn, σ 2 

> f,n

+ s2 

> f

) (5) where σf,n represents the per-pixel flux uncertainties of the stellar spectra, and sf is a free parameter that repre-sents additional per-pixel scatter in the model, and is in-tended to capture intrinsic scatter and any unaccounted-for systemic errors in the spectra (e.g., sky lines). The joint likelihood of the stellar labels and flux for a given star n can then be represented as 

p(ℓn, f n|A, B, zn, sf )= p(ℓn|A, zn) p(f n|B, zn, sf ), (6) which can be rearranged and expressed for a set of N

stars as the product of per-star likelihoods as follows: 

L(A, B, {zn}N , sf ) = p({ℓn}N , {f n}N |A, B, {zn}N , sf )=

> N

Y

> n

p(ℓn, f n|A, B, zn, sf ).

(7) 4 Behmard et al. 

We optimize this likelihood expression against a train-ing set of spectra and labels. In this training step, we infer the parameters A, B, and sf , as well as the latent vector zn. We then use the resulting model with de-fined parameters to infer labels given a test set of stellar spectra. 3.2. SDSS-V/MWM Data 

To construct our Lux model for late-K and M dwarf spectra, we use observations from the SDSS-V/MWM survey. This survey includes the APOGEE spectro-graphs, which have collected over one million high res-olution ( R ∼ 22,500) spectra in the H-band (1.51 −1.7 

μm) to date (Majewski et al. 2017; Wilson et al. 2019; Almeida et al. 2023). The APOGEE survey is designed to target bright objects and focuses mostly on red gi-ants, but also includes ∼50,000 M dwarfs. The current SDSS-V data release (DR19) includes products from the APOGEE Stellar Parameter and Chemical Abun-dances Pipeline (ASPCAP), namely stellar parameters and abundances for a wide set of elements at typical precision of <0.1 dex (Garc´ ıa P´ erez et al. 2016). How-ever, ASPCAP relies upon stellar atmosphere models, which makes ASPCAP chemical abundances unreliable for stars with <4500 K temperatures, such as late-K and M dwarfs. This motivates our data-driven approach to modeling M dwarf spectra with Lux (Horta et al. 2025). 

Lux can be executed on either flux- or continuum-normalized spectra. We carry out continuum normal-ization on the APOGEE late-K and M dwarf spectra via error-weighted broad Gaussian smoothing with ¯f (λ0) = 

P 

> j

(fj σ−2 

> j

wj (λ0)) 

P 

> j

(σ−2 

> j

wj (λ0)) , (8) where fj is the flux at pixel j of the wavelength range, 

σj is the uncertainty at pixel j, and the weight wj (λ0)is drawn from a Gaussian: 

wj (λ0) = e− (λ0−λj )2 

> L2

, (9) where L is chosen to be 10 ˚ A, which is slightly larger than typical absorption features in the APOGEE spec-tra. This is the same procedure used in Behmard et al. (2025) to continuum normalize APOGEE spectra in preparation for The Cannon .The APOGEE spectra typically have high SNR val-ues of ∼100/pix, and many are reported with SNR 

≳ 200/pix. These high SNR spectra have underesti-mated flux uncertainties. To address this, we apply the same procedure as Behmard et al. (2025) and set all 

<0.005 flux uncertainty values to 0.005, as typical nor-malized flux uncertainties should scale as ∼1/SNR, and APOGEE targets have maximum effective SNR levels of 

∼200/pix. 3.3. Training Set 

To construct our training set for Lux , we select late-K and M dwarfs with high-quality (SNR > 50/pix) APOGEE spectra and reliable labels for stellar param-eters and chemical abundances of interest. Because AS-PCAP does not provide reliable abundance information for <4500 K stars, we cannot use them as training la-bels. Instead, we tag M dwarfs with the ASPCAP abundances of solar-like (F, G and early-to-mid K) bi-nary companions, because we can assume that binary stars formed from the same parent molecular cloud and were born chemically homogeneous (e.g., De Silva et al. 2007, 2009; Bland-Hawthorn et al. 2010). These solar-like ( >4500 K) stars have reliable abundance informa-tion from ASPCAP because stellar atmosphere models work well within the solar-like temperature regime. In Behmard et al. (2025), we used a similar binary sam-ple from APOGEE as our M dwarf training set for The Cannon . To select binaries composed of late-K and M dwarfs with solar-like companions, we cross-match the current APOGEE data release with the El-Badry et al. (2021) binary catalog. We ensure that the primaries are late-K and M dwarfs by applying the relevant type-color sequence relations from Pecaut & Mamajek (2013), as well as a <4500 K on the ASPCAP-reported tempera-tures. To ensure that the binary companions are solar-like and have good quality abundances, we apply the following cuts on their ASPCAP parameters and abun-dances: log g > 4 dex 

Teff = 4500 − 6500 K [X/H] err < 0.1 dex (10) This results in a training set of 109 binary pairs with late-K and M dwarf spectra, and labels from solar-like companions. The spectra span SNR levels of 50 −660/pix, and the solar-like companion metallicities range from −0.60 < [Fe/H] < 0.28 dex. 5

Figure 1. 1-to-1 plots of our inferred vs. ASPCAP labels for our training set of late-K and M dwarfs with solar-like companions, after running a LOOCV scheme with Lux . The points are colored by the reduced χ2 of the flux model spectral fit. We report the rms scatter between the inferred late-K/M dwarf and solar-like companion labels in the top left of each plot, and the scatter of the solar-like companion labels below. The former values are smaller than the latter for every label, indicating that Lux 

recovers the labels using the late-K/M dwarf spectra with rms scatter that are well within the intrinsic solar-like label scatter. 6 Behmard et al. 

Following the procedure of Behmard et al. (2025), we use Teff (late-K and M dwarf ASPCAP values) and a set of chemical abundances (Fe, Mg, Al, Si, C, N, O, Ca, Ti, V, Cr, Ni; from solar-like companions) as our train-ing labels. As mentioned earlier, ASPCAP Teff values are considered reliable in the late-K to M dwarf regime (Souto et al. 2022). In Behmard et al. (2025), we de-termined that this particular abundance set does the best job (among all other tested combinations of ASP-CAP abundances) at reproducing the solar-like compan-ion abundance labels that we assume to be ground truth. We test this label set for our Lux model by running a leave-one-out cross-validation (LOOCV) scheme on our training set with the aim of reproducing the training la-bels. We illustrate our LOOCV results in Figure 1, and find that we reproduce the abundance training labels to precisions of ∼0.08 −0.20 dex, with the best perfor-mance for [Fe/H]. We remove stars in our training set with flux model spectral fit χ2 values > 100,000 (Birky et al. 2020; Behmard et al. 2025). These stars have properties that are not well-represented by the rest of the training set and require additional labels to describe their spectra (e.g., stellar activity, elements not included in ASPCAP), which is beyond the scope of this study. This removes four stars, leaving 105 in our final training set. After this cut, the peak χ2 is ∼10,700, which trans-lates to a reduced χ2 of ∼1.4 considering that there are 

∼7400 pixels in the APOGEE wavelength range (which can be considered the number of degrees of freedom). An excellent flux model fit would yield a reduced χ2 of approximately one. Thus, a reduced χ2 of ∼1.4 indi-cates a good fit (e.g., Birky et al. 2020; Rampalli et al. 2024). 3.4. Validation with Souto et al. (2022) and Wanderley et al. (2025a) Datasets 

We test how well our data-driven Lux model re-produces M dwarf abundances from stellar atmosphere modeling. Because standard stellar atmosphere models do not operate well outside of the solar-like ( ∼4500-6500 K) regime, out-of-the-box models must be considerably modified to fit M dwarf spectra. The largest M dwarf samples with abundances from modeling APOGEE spectra with this approach are presented in Souto et al. (2022) and Wanderley et al. (2025a). The Souto et al. (2022) sample consists of 21 M dwarfs observed by SDSS-IV/APOGEE 1 (Blanton et al. 2017), with spec-tra collected by the APOGEE-N instrument and re-duced as part of APOGEE DR16 (Nidever et al. 2015; Ahumada et al. 2020; J¨ onsson et al. 2020). Starting with the APOGEE DR17 line list (Smith et al. 2021), Souto et al. (2022) added several prominent M dwarf spectral features (e.g., Ni I lines present in APOGEE spectra of metal-rich M dwarfs) and generated synthetic spec-tra with the TurboSpectrum code (Plez 2012) and LTE MARCS model atmospheres (Gustafsson et al. 2008). The synthetic spectra were manually adjusted to ensure the best fit to each APOGEE spectrum. This enabled Souto et al. (2022) to robustly derive Teff , log g, Fe, C, O, Mg, Al, K, and Ca for their M dwarf sample. Wan-derley et al. (2025a) used the same procedure to derive 

Teff , log g, oxygen abundances A(O), and bulk metal-licity [M/H] for 48 M dwarfs with newer spectra from APOGEE DR17. The quality of these M dwarf abundance datasets makes them excellent validation sets for our Lux model. We use the same implementation of Lux as in our LOOCV test to assess how well we can reproduce re-ported M dwarf [Fe/H] and [M/H], respectively from Souto et al. (2022) Wanderley et al. (2025a). Bulk metallicity [M/H] abundances can be likened to iron abundances. We show our results in Figure 2. Our in-ferred [Fe/H] values agree with the [Fe/H] and [M/H] values from Souto et al. (2022) and Wanderley et al. (2025a) to precisions of 0.16 dex and 0.11 dex, respec-tively, and adhere convincingly to 1-to-1 trends. The reduced χ2 values of the model fit to spectra are 1.5 and 1.4 for the two samples, respectively, indicating good fits. The lower precisions in inferred [Fe/H] compared to our LOOCV test (0.08 dex) likely stem from differences in data reduction pipelines between APOGEE data re-leases; we use DR19 spectra for our training set, while Wanderley et al. (2025a) and Souto et al. (2022) use DR17 and DR16 for their samples, respectively. These data reduction differences have accumulated from DR16 to DR19, so our inferred [Fe/H] precision is lower for the Souto et al. (2022) sample compared to the Wanderley et al. (2025a) sample. Still, our [Fe/H] abundances agree well with the reported values from both these datasets, indicating that our model is robust at inferring M dwarf metallicities. 3.5. Label Uncertainties 

To derive uncertainties on labels inferred from our Lux 

model, we estimate the scatter between labels from re-peat APOGEE observations of the same star. This is the same procedure used in Behmard et al. (2025) to es-timate label uncertainties on similar data-driven models of M dwarf spectra. We identify ∼500 late-K and M dwarfs that each have two very high-quality (SNR >

200/pix) visit spectra that we denote A and B. We then define a quantity ZA,B for each star and label: 

ZA,B = ℓA − ℓB

q

2σ2

> inf late

, (11) 7     

> Figure 2. 1-to-1 plots of our inferred [Fe/H] abundances versus the reported [M/H] and [Fe/H] abundances from the Wanderley et al. (2025a) (left) and Souto et al. (2022) (right) samples using our Lux model. The points are colored by the reduced χ2of the flux model fit. We report the rms scatter between the inferred and reported abundances in the top left of each plot, and the intrinsic scatter of the reported abundances below. The former values are smaller than the latter for every label, indicating that our model recovers the reported abundances with rms scatter well within their intrinsic scatter.

where ℓA and ℓB are the inferred values for a particular label included in our model ( Teff or a chemical abun-dance) using spectrum A or B. We fit for σinf late , which can be thought of as the additional scatter needed to account for the difference in inferred labels from dif-ferent APOGEE visit spectra A and B, and as such should include all sources of uncertainty endemic to the APOGEE data reduction and ASPCAP pipeline. The 

σinf late term is multiplied by two to account for the two visit spectra. We fit for the σinf late factors so that the 13 distributions of ZA,B (corresponding to our 13 labels) from our sample of ∼500 stars are normal distributions centered at 0, with standard deviations of 1. The re-sultant σinf late values that we take as uncertainties on 

Teff and chemical abundances from our model are 27.5 K and 0.03 −0.11 dex, respectively. Our uncertainty on [Fe/H], which we use frequently throughout this study focused on M dwarf metallicity, is 0.05 dex.  

> 4.

SINGLES VS. MULTIS METALLICITY We apply our Lux model to our sample of late-K and M dwarfs with singles and multis to derive their chemi-cal abundances. Specifically, this is our confirmed late-K and M dwarf planet sample with APOGEE spectra, con-sisting of 137 singles and 48 multis containing 125 plan-ets. We infer our full set of Lux model labels ( Teff , Fe, Mg, Al, Si, C, N, O, Ca, Ti, V, Cr, Ni) and assess poten-tial abundance differences between singles and multis. We first examine [Fe/H], a proxy for bulk metallicity, and frequently refer to it as such throughout the rest of this manuscript. The metallicity distribution of late-K and M dwarfs with multis appears more metal-poor com-pared to that of singles (Figure 3, upper row). To quan-tify this, we resample each [Fe/H] value from a normal distribution with sigma set to the metallicity uncertainty of 0.46 dex, and generate a set of 1000 metallicity cu-mulative distribution functions (CDFs) (similar to boot-strap analyses in, e.g., Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. 2023; Vissapragada & Behmard 2025). The resulting distribu-tions appear quite different between singles and multis. We then perform a two-sample Anderson-Darling (A-D) test on each of the 1000 pairs of resampled CDFs, and calculate a mean p-value of 0.032, i.e., moderate ev-idence that the metallicity distributions of singles and multis do not belong to the same underlying population. If we restrict to M dwarfs ( <4000 K), our planet sample gets smaller (90 singles and 32 multis containing 83 plan-ets), but the difference in metallicity CDFs of singles and multis appears more significant (Figure 4, upper row). The associated A-D p-value is 0.00079, which constitutes strong evidence that M dwarfs with multis are signifi-cantly more metal-poor compared to those with singles. Tentative evidence ( p = 0.015) for this result was first reported in Anderson et al. (2021) using indirect metal-licity proxies. More recently, Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. (2023) and Wanderley et al. (2025a) reported it with significance ( p = 0.001 and 0.002, respectively) using samples of heterogeneous metallicities (i.e., derived from different abundance pipelines), and homogeneous metal-licities for <50 systems, respectively. We use our larger sample of homogeneous abundances to further confirm this result at higher significance. We find that host star metallicity decreases with planet multiplicity, which is 8 Behmard et al.    

> Figure 3. Histograms (left) and associated bootstrapped CDFs (right) of host star metallicities for singles (purple) and multis (orange). The top row corresponds to our total sample of late-K and M dwarf systems with metallicities, while the bottom row corresponds to our comparison sample of FGK dwarfs. The CDFs for the late-K/M dwarf sample were generated by resampling from metallicity uncertainties 1000 times, while those for the FGK dwarfs were resampled 100 times. We provide associated A-D p-values for singles versus multis in the lower right corners of the CDF plots.

also reported in Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. (2023). For our systems with 1, 2, 3, and 4+ planets, the average [Fe/H] value is −0.05, −0.13, −0.21, and −0.29 dex, re-spectively. Many studies have demonstrated that giant planets are preferentially found around metal-rich host stars. This is well-known among FGK dwarfs (e.g., Santos et al. 2004; Fischer & Valenti 2005) and more recently was demonstrated for M dwarfs as well (Gan et al. 2025). Giant planets are also preferentially found in single sys-tems where they are the only observed planet (e.g., Stef-fen et al. 2012). To re-assess our M dwarf singles versus multis results in this context, we restrict our sample to small planets ( <4 R⊕). This cuts our sample to 81 sin-gles and 31 multis containing 81 planets. This is not much smaller than our sample including giant planets because most of the planets in our sample are small. We apply the same analysis and generate 1000 pairs of metallicity CDFs for singles and multis (Figure 4, lower panel), and find that the resulting A-D p-value decreases in significance, but is still strong ( p = 0.0013). This demonstrates that the metallicity difference holds for small planets and is independent of known trends between giant planets, their proclivity for single-planet systems, and host star metallicity. 4.1. Comparison with FGK Dwarf Systems 

Removing late-K dwarfs from our sample and restrict-ing to M dwarfs results in a stronger metallicity dif-ference between singles and multis. This suggests that the difference depends on stellar type, which potentially agrees with previous studies that report no discernible difference in metallicities between singles and multis around FGK dwarfs (e.g., Romero-Mirza & Kempton 2018; Weiss et al. 2018). We assess this with a compar-ison sample of singles and multis around FGK dwarfs (4500 < T eff < 6500 K and log g > 4 dex) with high-quality APOGEE spectra (SNR > 50/pix) and reliable abundances ([X/H] err < 0.1 dex) from the ASPCAP pipeline. We construct this sample by cross-matching transiting planets in the Exoplanet Archive with SDSS-V DR19 after applying the cuts described above to AS-PCAP quantities. This yields a sample of 708 singles and 223 multis hosting 563 planets. We compare the 9Rp < 4 R⊕RP < 4 R⊕   

> Figure 4. Histograms (left) and associated bootstrapped CDFs (right) of M dwarf host star metallicities for singles (purple) and multis (orange). The top row corresponds to our total sample of M dwarf systems with metallicities, while the bottom row corresponds to the same sample, but after removing systems with planets larger than 4 R⊕. We provide associated A-D p-values for singles versus multis in the lower right corners of the CDF plots.

metallicity CDFs of singles and multis using their [Fe/H] values from ASPCAP (Figure 3, lower row). Because the ASPCAP pipeline is reliable for solar-like stars, we can use the FGK dwarf ASPCAP abundances directly (which was not possible for our M dwarf sample). We resample from the metallicity uncertainties 100 times and recover an A-D p-value of 0.29, indicating that the metallicity distributions of multis and singles around FGK dwarfs are not statistically distinguishable. This is in agreement with previous studies (Romero-Mirza & Kempton (2018) and Weiss et al. (2018) report p-values of 0.43 and 0.29, respectively), and suggests that the apparent trend of multis orbiting more metal-poor stars compared to singles emerges in the transition from the FGK to M dwarf regime. 4.2. Chemical Abundances Beyond Bulk Metallicity 

Our Lux model provides chemical abundances beyond [Fe/H]. We use these abundances of other elements (Mg, Al, Si, C, N, O, Ca, Ti, V, Cr, and Ni) to explore poten-tial trends between M dwarf singles and multis in more detailed chemical space. We find that M dwarfs with multis are significantly more metal-poor compared to those with singles for all elements in [X/H] form, which is unsurprising given that all abundances are correlated with each other through nucleosynthesis. The A-D p-values from comparing singles versus multis for all [X/H] chemical abundances range from p = 0.0002 −0.024. We also test if there are trends between singles and multis if we remove the bulk metallicity contribution (i.e., in [X/Fe] form). Before resampling from the abun-dance uncertainties via our bootstrap approach, there are significant differences in several α-abundances be-tween multis and singles; [Mg/Fe], [Si/Fe], and [O/Fe] have A-D p-values that range from p = 0.01 −0.0002. Multis are enhanced compared to singles in all cases. Once we apply the bootstrap approach, only [O/Fe] re-mains significant ( p = 0.016). However, this changes again if we restrict to small planets ( <4 R⊕) to remove the effect that singles are often giant planets hosted by metal-rich stars. Bootstrap analysis considering only small planets yields more significant trends ( p = 0.15, 0.0015, and 0.00088 for [Mg/Fe], [Si/Fe], and [O/Fe], re-spectively). Thus, it is possible that larger amounts of 

α-elements in low-Fe environments enhances formation of multiple small planets over single small planets. 10 Behmard et al.    

> Figure 5. Histograms (left) and associated bootstrapped CDFs (right) of M dwarf host star properties (masses, rotation periods, and ages) for singles (purple) and multis (orange). The top row corresponds to empirically-determined host star masses, the middle row to rotation periods derived from photometric measurements, and the bottom row to ages measured from gyrochronology. We provide associated A-D p-values for singles versus multis in the lower right corners of the CDF plots.

The A-D p-values of [N/Fe] and [Cr/Fe] for M dwarf singles versus multis are also quite significant ( p =0.00024 and 0.0011, respectively). Unlike trends with the α-elements in our sample, [N/Fe] and [Cr/Fe] are de-pleted in singles compared to multis. These elements are produced via different nucleosynthetic channels, with Cr predominantly from Type la supernovae as an Fe-peak element, and N through the CNO cycle. This makes it difficult to identify a single astrophysical mechanism be-hind these trends. We conclude that a larger sample of M dwarf planet hosts with detailed chemical abundance information is needed to identify differences between sin-gles and multis beyond bulk metallicity.  

> 5.

ADDITIONAL HOST STAR PROPERTIES To test the source of the metallicity discrepancy be-tween M dwarf hosts of singles and multis, we examine other host star properties such as mass, rotation period, and age. 5.1. Mass 11 Previous studies do not report significant differences in host star mass between FGK dwarfs that host sin-gles versus multis (e.g., Weiss et al. 2018). We use our sample to test if this holds in the M dwarf regime. To obtain homogeneous masses for our M dwarf hosts, we use the empirical relation between M dwarf mass and Two Micron All Sky Survey (2MASS) MKS -band mag-nitude reported in Mann et al. (2019). We first assess our larger sample that is not cross-matched with SDSS-V DR19 that contains 370 singles and 248 planets within 97 multis around late-K and M dwarfs. We are solely interested in the M dwarf regime, so we remove late-K dwarf systems from our sample by imposing the type-color relation for M dwarfs from Pecaut & Mamajek (2013). This leaves us with 201 singles and 136 planets within 53 multis. As in our chemical abundance anal-ysis, we resample each host star mass from a normal distribution with sigma set to its associated uncertainty value 1000 times. We then compare the host star mass CDFs between our singles and multis, and find them to be statistically indistinguishable with an A-D p-value of 0.22 (Figure 5, top row). We conclude that there is no significant difference in host star mass between singles and multis around M dwarfs, similar to findings for FGK systems. 5.2. Rotation Period 

While FGK dwarfs that host singles versus multis do not appear to have significantly different rotation peri-ods (e.g., Weiss et al. 2018), this may differ for M dwarf hosts. Several studies find this: Ballard & Johnson (2016) report that M dwarf multis orbit slightly faster rotators than singles, while Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. (2023) report the opposite. In both cases, the differences in rotation period between singles and multis are only marginally significant ( ∼2σ). We investigate this further with our M dwarf sample by measuring rotation periods with observations from photometric surveys such as Ke-pler (Borucki et al. 2010), TESS (Ricker et al. 2015), and ZTF (Masci et al. 2019). We cross-match our sam-ple with existing rotation period catalogs (McQuillan et al. 2014; Santos et al. 2019; Irwin et al. 2011; Newton et al. 2017; Berta et al. 2012; Lu et al. 2022, 2024a,b; Boyle et al. 2026), which results in 56 singles and 24 planets within 11 multis with reported rotation periods. We assume uncertainties of 10%, the nominal accepted value for differential rotation measurements (Epstein & Pinsonneault 2014). Again, we resample from the rota-tion period uncertainties 1000 times to generate CDFs for our multis versus singles. We find them to be sta-tistically indistinguishable with an A-D p-value of 0.79, and conclude that our M dwarf hosts of multis versus singles do not have significantly different rotation peri-ods (Figure 5, middle row). 5.3. Age 

We use stellar rotation periods and photometric ef-fective temperatures derived from extinction-corrected 

Gaia DR3 BP-RP colors to estimate ages via gy-rochronology (Barnes 2003). Gyrochronology is cur-rently the most widely applicable age-dating method for single main-sequence stars; aside from stellar ro-tation, most observable stellar properties evolve only slightly during the main-sequence phase. We use the ex-tinction map taken from the Bayestar19 3D dust map (Green et al. 2019), and the gyrochronology relation from GPgyro (Lu et al. 2024a) 2, which is an empirical gyrochronology relation calibrated using Gaussian Pro-cesses on kinematic ages. To derive gyrochronology ages for our M dwarf sample, we must restrict to systems with reliable rotation periods and photometric temperatures. This reduces our sample to 44 singles and 15 planets within 7 multis. Our bootstrap approach of resampling 1000 times from age uncertainties yields an A-D p-value of 0.97, indicating no significant difference. However, this is a small sample with few multis. We conclude that more systems are needed to robustly assess age.  

> 6.

PLANET PROPERTIES We do not uncover any significant differences in host star properties beyond metallicity between M dwarf sin-gles and multis. This suggests that the host star metal-licity difference stems from planet formation rather than aspects of the host star. We examine this by comparing planet properties of singles versus multis here. 6.1. Planet Radius 

We first examine planet radii between M dwarf sin-gles and multis. Because this analysis does not involve chemical abundances, we begin with our full M dwarf sample of 201 singles and 53 multis that contain 136 planets (as opposed to our smaller sample cross-matched with SDSS-V DR19). We also add a cut of <30% frac-tional uncertainty on Rp/R ∗ values from the Exoplanet Archive. This leaves us with 151 singles and 37 multis containing 95 planets. To compare planet radii robustly, we require homogeneous measurements. We re-derive planet radius values from the reported Rp/R ∗ values for each planet, and homogeneous host star radii. We calcu-late host star radii using the empirical relation between M dwarf radii and MKs absolute magnitude established  

> 2Avaliable at https://github.com/lyx12311/GPgyro

12 Behmard et al.   

> Figure 6. Histograms (left) and associated bootstrapped CDFs (right) of planet radii (top) and orbital periods (bottom) for singles (purple) and multis (orange). We provide associated A-D p-values for M dwarf singles versus multis in the lower right corners of the CDF plots.

in Wanderley et al. (2025b) with M dwarfs observed in APOGEE DR17: 

R∗ = a0 + a1MKs + a2M 2 

> Ks

(12) where a0 = 1.7420, a1 = −0.2925, and a2 = 0.0123, and their standard deviations are, respectively, 0.1599, 0.0522, and 0.0042. We incorporate these uncertainties as well as uncertainties on MKs by sampling from Gaus-sian distributions with 1 σ set as the uncertainty values. We apply our bootstrap approach of resampling from planet radius uncertainties 1000 times. We find that singles preferentially host giant planets ( Rp > 6 R⊕), which is a known trend among FGK and M dwarf sys-tems (e.g., Steffen et al. 2012; Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. 2023). This trend creates a slight difference in planet radii between singles and multis (A-D p = 0.030) (Fig-ure 6, top panel). This is similar to planet radii results for FGK dwarf singles and multis; Weiss et al. (2018) report an A-D p-value of 0.02. If we restrict our sam-ple to small planets ( Rp < 4 R⊕), our A-D p-value in-creases to 0.45, indicating no significant difference. This is again similar to results for FGK dwarf systems from Weiss et al. (2018), who report an A-D p-value of 0.44 after the same cut. We conclude that singles and mul-tis around M dwarfs exhibit no significant differences in planet radii, aside from the known trend that giant planets are preferentially found in single systems. These results are indistinguishable from those of singles and multis around FGK dwarfs. 6.2. Planet Orbital Period 

We next examine planet orbital periods between sin-gles and multis. As in our planet radius analysis, we begin with our full M dwarf sample of 201 singles and 53 multis containing 136 planets. We remove planets that lack orbital period measurements from the Exoplanet Archive, leaving 190 singles and 47 multis containing 119 planets. There are significantly more singles at short or-bital periods ( P < 5 days) compared to multis (Figure 6, bottom panel). Beyond 19 days, the orbital periods of singles and multis are similar. These trends are also observed in singles and multis around FGK dwarfs (e.g., Weiss et al. 2018) and other M dwarf samples (Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. 2023; Wanderley et al. 2025a). We apply our bootstrap approach of resampling from orbital period uncertainties 1000 times. This yields an A-D p-value of 0.00019 (Figure 6, bottom panel), indi-cating that the planets in M dwarf singles have signifi-13 cantly shorter orbital periods compared those in multis. If we restrict to small ( Rp < 4 R⊕) planets, the A-D 

p-value remains significant at 0.00044. This is similar to reported differences in orbital period between FGK singles and multis ( p = 0.002, Weiss et al. 2018), though our result is an order-of-magnitude stronger. However, our sample is smaller and may be subject to more ob-servational biases. The mechanism behind why single planets tend to cluster at <5 day orbital periods for FGK and M dwarf systems is likely the same. The excess of short-period single planets is likely shaped by dynamical evolution (Steffen & Coughlin 2016). For example, these planets may have originated in multi-planet systems that migrated inward in res-onant chains. The outcome is thought to be a sin-gle short-period inner planet, and additional planets at periods beyond 10 days (e.g., Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez et al. 2023). The longer period planets might be dy-namically excited to large mutual inclinations, making them undetectable via transits. A similar outcome can be reached in the absence of resonances, for example through planet-planet scattering (e.g., Chatterjee et al. 2008, or chaotic secular interactions between planetary companions (Petrovich et al. 2019). These dynamical scenarios are consistent with observations that systems with ultra-short period planets (USPs, P < 1 day) and additional transiting planets have wider period ratios between their planets when compared to multi-planet systems without USPs (e.g., Sanchis-Ojeda et al. 2014). They are also consistent with observations demonstrat-ing that multi-planet systems with the shortest-period planets ( a/R ∗ < 5, or P = 1.3 days for a Sun-like star) are also those with the largest mutual inclinations be-tween other planets in the system (Dai et al. 2018). These results indicate that our observed excess of short-period planets in M dwarf singles is the outcome of sim-ilar dynamical effects. 6.3. Planet Eccentricity 

It is well-established that multi-planet systems are less eccentric compared to single planet systems around FGK dwarfs (e.g., Limbach & Turner 2015). This was recently demonstrated for M dwarf systems as well (Sagear & Ballard 2023). Thus, singles and multis are characterized by distinctly hotter and cooler dynamics, respectively. We test if this eccentricity effect can be seen in our sample of M dwarf systems with metallici-ties derived from APOGEE observations. To measure orbital eccentricities for our sample cross-matched with SDSS-V DR19, we leverage the photoeccentric effect (Dawson & Johnson 2012). Photoeccentricities rely on precise characterization of the ingress and egress from transit light curves, and we use precise transit light curves from Kepler and TESS for our analysis. Restrict-ing our sample to systems with Kepler or TESS data yields 28 TESS singles, 7 TESS multis systems contain-ing 13 planets, 14 Kepler singles, and 9 Kepler multis systems containing 20 planets. This totals 28 singles and 33 multis with measurable photoeccentricities. We exclude systems with only K2 observations because the nature of K2 data is such that ingress and egress shapes can be characterized much less precisely than for Kepler 

and TESS. We expect that excluding K2 targets at this sample size will not measurably impact the precision of the underlying eccentricity distribution. We summarize the transit fitting process here; the full process, including transit fit parameters and prior dis-tributions, is described in detail in Sagear et al. (2026a). We detrend and fit the Kepler and TESS transit light curves with the ALDERAAN transit fitting pipeline (Gilbert et al. 2025). Light curves are uniformly de-trended and processed within the pipeline, with transit timing variations incorporated where necessary for Ke-pler systems, and nested sampling is used to sample the high-dimensional transit posteriors. We extract e and 

ω distributions from the transit posteriors using post-model importance sampling (MacDougall et al. 2023). The precision of stellar host density measurements di-rectly affects the precision of eccentricity measurements from photometry. For the Kepler sample of planet hosts, we use the Mann et al. (2015) and Mann et al. (2019) em-pirical stellar density formulas, leveraging stellar paral-lax measurements from Gaia (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2016, 2023b) along with Ks magnitudes from 2MASS (Skrutskie et al. 2006). For the TESS sample, we use stellar densities published in the TESS Input Catalog’s list of known Cool Dwarf Targets (Muirhead et al. 2018; Stassun et al. 2018). These sources provide precise stel-lar densities for M dwarfs than stellar properties from isochrone models, which tend to be poorly modeled in this mass regime. We infer the underlying eccentric-ity distributions for the population of singles and multis within a Bayesian hierarchical framework; full details of this process are described in Sagear et al. (2026b) and Sagear et al. (2026a). We take the underlying eccen-tricity distribution to resemble a Rayleigh distribution and apply a prior on the Rayleigh sigma parameter of 

σR ∼ U (0 , 1]. The geometric transit probability is non-uniform as a function of eccentricity (Kipping 2014); we take care to account for this as a prior within our Bayesian framework for transiting planets. Individual planet photoeccentricities are inherently imprecise, in part because the eccentricity measurement is highly degenerate with the system viewing angle (or 14 Behmard et al.    

> Figure 7. Underlying eccentricity distributions for M dwarf singles and multis. Photoeccentricities are derived from Ke-pler and TESS data, and are combined with eccentricities from RV measurements where available.

longitude of periastron ω). We include eccentricity mea-surements from RV observations, if available. Among the systems in our sample, 12 singles and 3 multis con-taining 7 planets have reliable RV data and posterior measurements. The planets with eccentricity measure-ments from RV observations and their sources are as follows: L 98-59 b, c, and d (Cadieux et al. 2025), HD 260655 b and c (Luque, R. et al. 2022), TOI-4342 b and c (Parc, L´ ena et al. 2026), K2-18 b (Sarkis et al. 2018), Kepler-16 b (Triaud et al. 2022), Kepler-45 b (Johnson et al. 2012), TOI-1452 b (Cadieux et al. 2022), TOI-1266 b (Greklek-McKeon et al. 2025), Ross 176 b (Gerald´ ıa-Gonz´ alez, S. et al. 2025), TOI-654.01 (Ikuta et al. 2025), L 168-9 b (Hobson, M. J. et al. 2024), TOI-269 b (Cointepas, M. et al. 2021), K2-25 b (Stefansson et al. 2020), TOI-3785 b (Powers et al. 2023), TOI-1728 b (Kanodia et al. 2020). If full eccentricity posteriors from RV data are not available, we take the published eccentricity mean and uncertainty and assume the ec-centricity distribution is a truncated normal distribution between 0 and 1. We hierarchically model the underlying eccentricity distribution of both singles and multis as Rayleigh dis-tributions and present the best-fit models and their un-certainties, shown in Figure 7. The underlying eccentric-ity distributions for this sample of singles and multis are consistent with the results of Sagear & Ballard (2023), who conducted a similar analysis using a homogeneous sample of photoeccentricities for M dwarf planets with 

Kepler data. Like Sagear & Ballard (2023), we con-clude that planets in M dwarf singles are significantly more eccentric than those in M dwarf multis.  

> 7.

DISCUSSION We find strong evidence that M dwarf hosts of multi-ple transiting planets (“multis”) are significantly more metal-poor than those with only one detected transit-ing planet (“singles”) ( p = 0.00079). This trend holds if we consider only small ( <4 R⊕) planets ( p = 0.0013), and is thus independent of the planet-metallicity corre-lation, and the known trend that giant planets are often “lonely” (i.e., found in singles). We do not uncover sig-nificant differences in any other host star property tested here (mass, rotation period, or age) between singles and multis. However, we do find differences in planet proper-ties, where planets in singles exhibit shorter orbital peri-ods and higher eccentricities compared to those in mul-tis. This suggests that metallicity differences in M dwarf systems instigate different planetary dynamics that give rise to different system architectures, and ultimately the distinction between singles and multis that we observe. There are many dynamical pathways linked to metal-licity that may sculpt singles as opposed to mul-tis. For example, higher metallicity systems are more likely to produce giant planets according to the planet-metallicity correlation. These giants may dynamically perturb initially co-planar planetary companions as they migrate in. For example, a giant planet that forms at the outskirts of a metal-rich system may initiate planet-planet scattering during migration, potentially ejecting planets from the system, or tilting their orbits to high mutual inclinations that prevent them from transiting the host star (Chatterjee et al. 2008). Alternatively, dynamical stirring could be instigated in the absence of giant perturbers by inward migration of small plan-ets in resonant chains (Izidoro et al. 2017), or secular chaos (Petrovich et al. 2019). Such dynamically active scenarios are favored in higher metallicity systems that can form more planets with heavier cores on shorter timescales (Dawson & Murray-Clay 2013). A likely out-come in all cases is only one transiting planet left be-hind. In accordance with our results, this planet may exhibit evidence of an eventful dynamical past, such as a high orbital eccentricity and/or a short orbital period resulting from inward migration. There is substantial observational evidence that these dynamical scenarios occur in both FGK and M dwarf systems. As mentioned earlier, giant planets are often found as the lone planet in single systems, and preferen-tially form around metal-rich FGK and M dwarfs (e.g., Gan et al. 2025; Bryan & Lee 2025). Planets in singles also have higher orbital eccentricities compared to those in multis with both FGK and M dwarf hosts (Limbach & Turner 2015; Sagear & Ballard 2023). Recently, it was demonstrated that small planets with high mutual 15 inclinations are more common around metal-rich stars of both types (Hua et al. 2025). Our discovery that M singles are more metal-rich than multis fits within this framework, as does our finding that host star metallicity decreases with planet multi-plicity in multis (which indicates a more dynamically quiet history). What is surprising is that these re-sults are not echoed in FGK dwarf systems. Romero-Mirza & Kempton (2018) was the first to demonstrate a lack of metallicity differences between FGK dwarf hosts of singles and multis from the Kepler mission. Later, Weiss et al. (2018) examined a larger sample of FGK systems with homogeneously-measured host star and planet properties, and found no significant differences between singles and multis for any of them, including metallicity ( p = 0.29). They interpreted this as evi-dence that singles and multis are drawn from the same underlying planet population. We find a near-identical result for the FGK singles and multis in our sample; they do not exhibit a significant difference in metallicity (p = 0.29). Nor does our M dwarf sample if we include late-K dwarf systems, though evidence for a tentative difference begins to emerge ( p = 0.032). Only when we restrict to M dwarf systems does the difference become significant ( p = 0.00079), indicating that it arises at the late-K to M dwarf transition. Why do observe a metallicity difference between sin-gles and multis around M dwarfs, but not FGK dwarfs? The answer may be related to protoplanetary disk mass. M dwarfs are less massive than FGK dwarfs, and ac-cordingly host less massive disks with smaller amounts of solid, planet-forming material. In the M dwarf case, metallicity may be the deciding factor in whether the planetary mass budget is large enough to instigate dy-namical evolution that leaves one transiting planet be-hind. In contrast, comparatively massive disks around FGK dwarfs may often contain enough solid mate-rial to form many planets with massive cores on short timescales that instigate disruptive dynamics, even in the low metallicity regime. Other possibilities are related to protoplanetary disk size. M dwarf disks are smaller than FGK dwarf disks, with a smaller radial extent. This implies that planets which form from an M dwarf disk will all reside relatively close to the host star, compared to those from an FGK dwarf disk. Close proximity of planets in the M dwarf case is more likely to instigate dynamics that result in a single transiting planet. This is enhanced in the high metallicity case that favors formation of giant planets, which are more likely to wreak dynamical havoc. An-other explanation related to disk extent is that multiple planets around M dwarfs are more likely to be observed because they exist in more compact configurations, com-pared to those around FGK dwarfs. In other words, true FGK multis may be observed as singles in transit data because their planets are spaced wider apart. This would wash out the metallicity difference between sin-gles and multis in the FGK case. Potentially related to this is an intriguing study by Brewer et al. (2018) that reports a significant difference in metallicity between singles and compact multis around FGK dwarfs. This is the only study to uncover a metallicity difference be-tween FGK singles and multis. Here, compact is defined as systems with three or more planets orbiting within 1 au. It is possible that Brewer et al. (2018) detected a metallicity difference between multis defined as such and singles because they restricted themselves to FGK sys-tems with compact planet configurations, which are less prone to such observational bias. In this scenario, FGK singles and multis also result from differential dynamics influenced by metallicity, but the multis are frequently observed as singles in transit data. The underlying mechanism for the observable metal-licity difference between singles and multis around M dwarfs, but not FGK dwarfs, is still unclear. However, there is ample evidence that the difference among M dwarf systems stems from planetary dynamics. We thus put forward the idea that M dwarf singles and multis are not drawn from the same underlying distribution, but rather are different populations with distinct dynamical histories. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We thank Heather Knutson, Shreyas Vissapragada, and Claudia Aguilera-G´ omez, as well as the CCA Exo-planet and Astro Data groups for supportive and pro-ductive conversations. Funding for the Sloan Digital Sky Survey V has been provided by the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation, the Heising-Simons Foundation, the National Science Foun-dation, and the Participating Institutions. SDSS ac-knowledges support and resources from the Center for High-Performance Computing at the University of Utah. SDSS telescopes are located at Apache Point Obser-vatory, funded by the Astrophysical Research Consor-tium and operated by New Mexico State University, and at Las Campanas Observatory, operated by the Carnegie Institution for Science. The SDSS web site is www.sdss.org. SDSS is managed by the Astrophysical Research Con-sortium for the Participating Institutions of the SDSS Collaboration, including the Carnegie Institution for Science, Chilean National Time Allocation Commit-tee (CNTAC) ratified researchers, Caltech, the Gotham 16 Behmard et al. 

Participation Group, Harvard University, Heidelberg University, The Flatiron Institute, The Johns Hop-kins University, L’Ecole polytechnique f´ ed´ erale de Lau-sanne (EPFL), Leibniz-Institut f¨ ur Astrophysik Pots-dam (AIP), Max-Planck-Institut f¨ ur Astronomie (MPIA Heidelberg), Max-Planck-Institut f¨ ur Extraterrestrische Physik (MPE), Nanjing University, National Astronom-ical Observatories of China (NAOC), New Mexico State University, The Ohio State University, Pennsylvania State University, Smithsonian Astrophysical Observa-tory, Space Telescope Science Institute (STScI), the Stellar Astrophysics Participation Group, Universidad Nacional Aut´ onoma de M´ exico, University of Arizona, University of Colorado Boulder, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, University of Toronto, University of Utah, University of Virginia, Yale University, and Yunnan University. This work made use of data from the European Space Agency (ESA) mission Gaia (https://www.cosmos.esa. int/gaia), processed by the Gaia Data Processing and Analysis Consortium (DPAC, https://www.cosmos. esa.int/web/gaia/dpac/consortium). Funding for the DPAC has been provided by national institutions, in particular the institutions participating in the Gaia Mul-tilateral Agreement. 

# Software: numpy (Harris et al. 2020), matplotlib 

(Hunter 2007), pandas (Wes McKinney 2010), scipy 

(Virtanen et al. 2020), scikit-learn (Pedregosa et al. 2011), astropy (Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013, 2018), JAX (Bradbury et al. 2018), numpyro (Phan et al. 2019; Bingham et al. 2019) REFERENCES 

Ahumada, R., Allende Prieto, C., Almeida, A., et al. 2020, ApJS, 249, 3, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab929e Allard, F., Hauschildt, P. H., Alexander, D. R., & Starrfield, S. 1997, ARA&A, 35, 137, doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.35.1.137 Almeida, A., Anderson, S. F., Argudo-Fern´ andez, M., et al. 2023, ApJS, 267, 44, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/acda98 Anderson, S. G., Dittmann, J. A., Ballard, S., & Bedell, M. 2021, AJ, 161, 203, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abe70b Andrae, R., Rix, H.-W., & Chandra, V. 2023, ApJS, 267, 8, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/acd53e Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068 Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ ocz, B. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f Ballard, S., & Johnson, J. A. 2016, ApJ, 816, 66, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/816/2/66 Barnes, S. A. 2003, ApJ, 586, 464, doi: 10.1086/367639 Behmard, A., Ness, M. K., Casey, A. R., et al. 2025, ApJ, 982, 13, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adaf1f Behmard, A., Ness, M. K., Cunningham, E. C., & Bedell, M. 2023, AJ, 165, 178, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acc32a Behmard, A., Petigura, E. A., & Howard, A. W. 2019, ApJ, 876, 68, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab14e0 Berta, Z. K., Irwin, J., Charbonneau, D., Burke, C. J., & Falco, E. E. 2012, AJ, 144, 145, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/144/5/145 Bingham, E., Chen, J. P., Jankowiak, M., et al. 2019, J. Mach. Learn. Res., 20, 28:1. http://jmlr.org/papers/v20/18-403.html Birky, J., Hogg, D. W., Mann, A. W., & Burgasser, A. 2020, ApJ, 892, 31, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab7004 Bland-Hawthorn, J., Krumholz, M. R., & Freeman, K. 2010, ApJ, 713, 166, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/713/1/166 Blanton, M. R., Bershady, M. A., Abolfathi, B., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 28, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa7567 Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., et al. 2010, Science, 327, 977, doi: 10.1126/science.1185402 Boyle, A. W., Bouma, L. G., & Mann, A. W. 2026, ApJS, 284, 75, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ae6657 Bradbury, J., Frostig, R., Hawkins, P., et al. 2018, JAX: composable transformations of Python+NumPy programs, 0.3.13. http://github.com/jax-ml/jax Brewer, J. M., Fischer, D. A., Valenti, J. A., & Piskunov, N. 2016, ApJS, 225, 32, doi: 10.3847/0067-0049/225/2/32 Brewer, J. M., Wang, S., Fischer, D. A., & Foreman-Mackey, D. 2018, ApJL, 867, L3, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aae710 Bryan, M. L., & Lee, E. J. 2025, ApJL, 982, L7, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adb0bd Cadieux, C., Doyon, R., Plotnykov, M., et al. 2022, The Astronomical Journal, 164, 96, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac7cea Cadieux, C., L’Heureux, A., Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., et al. 2025, The Astronomical Journal, 170, 154, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adef59 Casey, A. R., Hogg, D. W., Ness, M., et al. 2016, ArXiv e-prints. https://arxiv.org/abs/1603.03040 Chatterjee, S., Ford, E. B., Matsumura, S., & Rasio, F. A. 2008, ApJ, 686, 580, doi: 10.1086/590227 17 

Christiansen, J. L., McElroy, D. L., Harbut, M., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2506.03299, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.03299 Cointepas, M., Almenara, J. M., Bonfils, X., et al. 2021, A&A, 650, A145, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202140328 Dai, F., Masuda, K., & Winn, J. N. 2018, ApJL, 864, L38, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aadd4f Dawson, R. I., & Johnson, J. A. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 756, 122, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/756/2/122 Dawson, R. I., & Murray-Clay, R. A. 2013, ApJL, 767, L24, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/767/2/L24 De Silva, G. M., Freeman, K. C., Asplund, M., et al. 2007, AJ, 133, 1161, doi: 10.1086/511182 De Silva, G. M., Freeman, K. C., & Bland-Hawthorn, J. 2009, PASA, 26, 11, doi: 10.1071/AS08019 Dressing, C. D., & Charbonneau, D. 2015, ApJ, 807, 45, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/807/1/45 El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., & Heintz, T. M. 2021, MNRAS, 506, 2269, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab323 Epstein, C. R., & Pinsonneault, M. H. 2014, ApJ, 780, 159, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/780/2/159 Fabrycky, D. C., Lissauer, J. J., Ragozzine, D., et al. 2014, ApJ, 790, 146, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/790/2/146 Fischer, D. A., & Valenti, J. 2005, ApJ, 622, 1102, doi: 10.1086/428383 Gaia Collaboration, Prusti, T., de Bruijne, J. H. J., et al. 2016, A&A, 595, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201629272 Gaia Collaboration, Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G. A., et al. 2023a, A&A, 674, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243940 Gaia Collaboration, Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G. A., et al. 2023b, A&A, 674, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243940 Galgano, B., Stassun, K., & Rojas-Ayala, B. 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 159, 193, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab7f37 Gan, T., Theissen, C. A., Wang, S. X., Burgasser, A. J., & Mao, S. 2025, ApJS, 276, 47, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad9c65 Garc´ ıa P´ erez, A. E., Allende Prieto, C., Holtzman, J. A., et al. 2016, AJ, 151, 144, doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/151/6/144 Gerald´ ıa-Gonz´ alez, S., Orell-Miquel, J., Pall´ e, E., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A216, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202553719 Gilbert, G. J., Petigura, E. A., & Entrican, P. M. 2025, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 122, e2405295122, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2405295122 Green, G. M., Schlafly, E., Zucker, C., Speagle, J. S., & Finkbeiner, D. 2019, ApJ, 887, 93, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab5362 Greklek-McKeon, M., Vissapragada, S., Knutson, H. A., et al. 2025, The Astronomical Journal, 169, 292, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adc0fe Guiglion, G., Nepal, S., Chiappini, C., et al. 2024, A&A, 682, A9, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347122 Gustafsson, B., Edvardsson, B., Eriksson, K., et al. 2008, A&A, 486, 951, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:200809724 Hansen, B. M. S., & Murray, N. 2013, ApJ, 775, 53, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/775/1/53 Hardegree-Ullman, K. K., Cushing, M. C., Muirhead, P. S., & Christiansen, J. L. 2019, AJ, 158, 75, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab21d2 Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2 Hejazi, N., Crossfield, I. J. M., Souto, D., et al. 2024, ApJ, 973, 31, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad61dc Henry, T. J., Jao, W.-C., Subasavage, J. P., et al. 2006, AJ, 132, 2360, doi: 10.1086/508233 Hobson, M. J., Bouchy, F., Lavie, B., et al. 2024, A&A, 688, A216, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450505 Horta, D., Price-Whelan, A. M., Hogg, D. W., Ness, M. K., & Casey, A. R. 2025, AJ, 169, 314, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adcc20 Howard, A. W., Marcy, G. W., Bryson, S. T., et al. 2012, ApJS, 201, 15, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/201/2/15 Hua, X., Wang, S. X., An, D., et al. 2025, ApJL, 980, L46, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adb1dc Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science & Engineering, 9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55 Ikuta, K., Narita, N., Takarada, T., et al. 2025, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, 77, 1101, doi: 10.1093/pasj/psaf090 Irwin, J., Berta, Z. K., Burke, C. J., et al. 2011, ApJ, 727, 56, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/727/1/56 Izidoro, A., Ogihara, M., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 1750, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1232 Johnson, J. A., Gazak, J. Z., Apps, K., et al. 2012, The Astronomical Journal, 143, 111, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/143/5/111 J¨ onsson, H., Holtzman, J. A., Allende Prieto, C., et al. 2020, AJ, 160, 120, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aba592 Kanodia, S., Ca˜ nas, C. I., Stefansson, G., et al. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal, 899, 29, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aba0a2 Kipping, D. M. 2014, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 444, 2263, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu1561 Kollmeier, J. A., Zasowski, G., Rix, H.-W., et al. 2017, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1711.03234, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1711.03234 18 Behmard et al. 

Latham, D. W., Rowe, J. F., Quinn, S. N., et al. 2011, ApJL, 732, L24, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/732/2/L24 Li, J., Wong, K. W. K., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H.-W., & Chandra, V. 2024, ApJS, 272, 2, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ad2b4d Limbach, M. A., & Turner, E. L. 2015, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 112, 20, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1406545111 Lissauer, J. J., Ragozzine, D., Fabrycky, D. C., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 8, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/197/1/8 Lu, Y., Angus, R., Foreman-Mackey, D., & Hattori, S. 2024a, AJ, 167, 159, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad28b9 Lu, Y. L., Curtis, J. L., Angus, R., David, T. J., & Hattori, S. 2022, AJ, 164, 251, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac9bee Lu, Y. L., See, V., Amard, L., Angus, R., & Matt, S. P. 2024b, Nature Astronomy, 8, 223, doi: 10.1038/s41550-023-02126-2 Luque, R., Fulton, B. J., Kunimoto, M., et al. 2022, A&A, 664, A199, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202243834 MacDougall, M. G., Gilbert, G. J., & Petigura, E. A. 2023, The Astronomical Journal, 166, 61, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ace16d Majewski, S. R., Schiavon, R. P., Frinchaboy, P. M., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 94, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa784d Mann, A. W., Feiden, G. A., Gaidos, E., Boyajian, T., & Braun, K. v. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 804, 64, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/804/1/64 Mann, A. W., Gaidos, E., & Ansdell, M. 2013, ApJ, 779, 188, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/779/2/188 Mann, A. W., Dupuy, T., Kraus, A. L., et al. 2019, ApJ, 871, 63, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaf3bc Mann, A. W., Dupuy, T., Kraus, A. L., et al. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 871, 63, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaf3bc Masci, F. J., Laher, R. R., Rusholme, B., et al. 2019, PASP, 131, 018003, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aae8ac McQuillan, A., Mazeh, T., & Aigrain, S. 2014, ApJS, 211, 24, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/211/2/24 Melo, E., Souto, D., Cunha, K., et al. 2024, ApJ, 973, 90, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad5004 Ment, K., & Charbonneau, D. 2023, AJ, 165, 265, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acd175 Morton, T. D., & Winn, J. N. 2014, ApJ, 796, 47, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/796/1/47 Muirhead, P. S., Dressing, C. D., Mann, A. W., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 180, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aab710 Mulders, G. D., Pascucci, I., & Apai, D. 2015, ApJ, 814, 130, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/814/2/130 Ness, M., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H.-W., Ho, A. Y. Q., & Zasowski, G. 2015, ApJ, 808, 16, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/808/1/16 Newton, E. R., Irwin, J., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2017, ApJ, 834, 85, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/834/1/85 Nidever, D. L., Holtzman, J. A., Allende Prieto, C., et al. 2015, AJ, 150, 173, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/6/173 Parc, L´ ena, Cadieux, Charles, Grieves, Nolan, et al. 2026, A&A, 708, A81, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202558308 Pecaut, M. J., & Mamajek, E. E. 2013, ApJS, 208, 9, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/1/9 Pedregosa, F., Varoquaux, G., Gramfort, A., et al. 2011, Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2825 Petrovich, C., Deibert, E., & Wu, Y. 2019, AJ, 157, 180, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab0e0a Phan, D., Pradhan, N., & Jankowiak, M. 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1912.11554 Plez, B. 2012, Turbospectrum: Code for spectral synthesis, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:1205.004 Powers, L. C., Libby-Roberts, J., Lin, A. S. J., et al. 2023, The Astronomical Journal, 166, 44, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acd8bf Rains, A. D., Nordlander, T., Monty, S., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 529, 3171, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae560 Rampalli, R., Ness, M. K., Edwards, G. H., Newton, E. R., & Bedell, M. 2024, ApJ, 965, 176, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad303e Ricker, G. R., Winn, J. N., Vanderspek, R., et al. 2015, Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 1, 014003, doi: 10.1117/1.JATIS.1.1.014003 Rodr´ ıguez Mart´ ınez, R., Martin, D. V., Gaudi, B. S., et al. 2023, AJ, 166, 137, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aced9a Rojas-Ayala, B., Covey, K. R., Muirhead, P. S., & Lloyd, J. P. 2012, ApJ, 748, 93, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/748/2/93 Romero-Mirza, C. E., & Kempton, E. 2018, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1801.09706, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1801.09706 Sagear, S., & Ballard, S. 2023, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 120, e2217398120, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2217398120 Sagear, S., & Ballard, S. 2023, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 120, e2217398120, doi: 10.1073/pnas.2217398120 Sagear, S., Ballard, S., Daniel, K. J., et al. 2026a, The Astronomical Journal, 172, 42, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae71bf Sagear, S., Ballard, S., Gilbert, G. J., Albornoz, M., & Lam, C. 2026b, The Astronomical Journal, 171, 115, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae2d1b 19 

Sanchis-Ojeda, R., Rappaport, S., Winn, J. N., et al. 2014, ApJ, 787, 47, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/787/1/47 Santos, A. R. G., Garc´ ıa, R. A., Mathur, S., et al. 2019, ApJS, 244, 21, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/ab3b56 Santos, N. C., Israelian, G., & Mayor, M. 2004, A&A, 415, 1153, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20034469 Sarkis, P., Henning, T., K¨ urster, M., et al. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 155, 257, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aac108 SDSS Collaboration, Adamane Pallathadka, G., Aghakhanloo, M., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2507.07093, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.07093 Skrutskie, M. F., Cutri, R. M., Stiening, R., et al. 2006, The Astronomical Journal, 131, 1163, doi: 10.1086/498708 Smith, V. V., Bizyaev, D., Cunha, K., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 254, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abefdc Souto, D., Cunha, K., Smith, V. V., et al. 2022, ApJ, 927, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac4891 Stassun, K. G., Oelkers, R. J., Pepper, J., et al. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 102, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aad050 Stefansson, G., Mahadevan, S., Maney, M., et al. 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 160, 192, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abb13a Steffen, J. H., & Coughlin, J. L. 2016, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 113, 12023, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1606658113 Steffen, J. H., Ragozzine, D., Fabrycky, D. C., et al. 2012, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 109, 7982, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1120970109 Ting, Y.-S., Conroy, C., Rix, H.-W., & Cargile, P. 2019, ApJ, 879, 69, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab2331 Triaud, A. H. M. J., Standing, M. R., Heidari, N., et al. 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 511, 3561, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3712 Van Eylen, V., Albrecht, S., Huang, X., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 61, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaf22f Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2 Vissapragada, S., & Behmard, A. 2025, AJ, 169, 117, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ada143 Wanderley, F., Cunha, K., Souto, D., Smith, V. V., & Daflon, S. 2025a, AJ, 170, 177, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adef12 Wanderley, F., Cunha, K., Smith, V. V., et al. 2025b, ApJ, 993, 233, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae058e Weiss, L. M., Isaacson, H. T., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 254, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aae70a Wes McKinney. 2010, in Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, ed. St´ efan van der Walt & Jarrod Millman, 56 – 61, doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a Wilson, J. C., Hearty, F. R., Skrutskie, M. F., et al. 2019, PASP, 131, 055001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/ab0075 Xie, J.-W., Dong, S., Zhu, Z., et al. 2016, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 113, 11431, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1604692113