Title: Hankel-Koopman Finite-Horizon Energy Decomposition of Coupled Experimental Data: A Three-Phase Data-Driven Twin Forecasting Framework

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.14501v1

Published Time: Tue, 15 Sep 2026 01:41:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 93

Markdown Content:
# Hankel-Koopman Finite-Horizon Energy Decomposition of Coupled Experimental Data: A Three-Phase Data-Driven Twin Forecasting Framework 

## Diana A. Bistrian 1* and Marcel Topor 1

1* Department of Electrical Engineering and Industrial Informatics, University Politehnica Timisoara, Timisoara, 300006, Romania. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): diana.bistrian@upt.ro; Contributing authors: marcel.topor@upt.ro; 

Abstract 

This paper introduces a unified three-phase data-driven twin framework for finite-horizon forecasting of physical quantities from coupled experimental mea-surements. The framework combines a new Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition with orthogonal modes and an inverse-calibrated multi-output nonlinear autoregressive model with exogenous inputs. The nonlinear dynamics are identified and simulated in the Hankel coefficient space over a prescribed calibration window. Candidate models are then evaluated after anti-diagonal recovery and reconstruction of the corresponding trajectories in the physical measurement space. The resulting simulated channel trajectories serve as exoge-nous inputs to a recursive forecasting model for the quantity of interest. In this way, the proposed framework integrates reduced-order representation, nonlinear dynamical identification, measurement reconstruction, and explainable forecast-ing. The mathematical analysis specializes Koopman delay-coordinate theory to the serialized multichannel Hankel lift and establishes its compatibility with the shifted Hankel representation. It also proves the orthogonality of the modes and the finite-horizon modal energy decomposition, together with the existence, uniqueness, inverse stability, and forward stability of the identified models under explicitly stated hypotheses. In a solar-power-plant case study, the framework yields consistently high correlations and low relative errors across all considered forecast horizons, demonstrating its ability to preserve the temporal evolution of the quantity of interest during recursive forecasting. 

1arXiv:2609.14501v1 [math.NA] 13 Sep 2026 Keywords: Hankel-Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition, Simulation of dynamical systems, Operator-theoretic methods, Forecasting experimental data, Artificial neural networks and deep learning  

> MSC Classification: 37M10 , 37M05 , 93B28 , 93B30 , 68T07

# Mathematical Notation and Abbreviations 

The principal mathematical symbols and abbreviations used throughout this work are summarized in Table 1. 

Table 1 : Key mathematical notation and abbreviations used throughout the article. 

Symbol or abbreviation Description 

N , tk, ∆ t Number of sampling instants on the finite modeling horizon, 

kth sampling instant, and uniform sampling interval. 

Tfin , Tfin Finite modeling horizon and its duration; the complete experimental record is indexed by Tfin .

NQ, Tobs , Tobs Number of paired quantity–channel identification samples, finite observation horizon satisfying Tobs ⊆ T fin , and its duration. 

ns = NQ + 1, H,

TFH = H∆t, TH

First calibration-sample index, number of calibration intervals, calibration duration, and finite calibration window satisfying TH ⊆ T fin , Tobs ∩ T H = ∅, and max Tobs < min TH .

Nf , Tf = Nf ∆t, Tfor Number of recursively forecast samples, forecast lead time, and finite forecast horizon satisfying Tfor ⊆ T H .

F = R or C, m Scalar field of the experimental data and reduced representations, and number of measured channels. 

yk, εk, Y Measured vector, measurement noise and unresolved effects, and snapshot matrix Y = [ y1, . . . , yN ]. ¯y, xk, X Reference state, centered measurement xk = yk − ¯y, and centered snapshot matrix. 

1N , 1NI All-ones column vectors of lengths N and NI , respectively; their products with ¯ y repeat the reference state across the modeling or calibration samples. (·)H, ( ·)T, ( ·)† Conjugate (Hermitian) transpose, transpose, and Moore–Penrose pseudoinverse, respectively. 

r, Ψr , ψj Retained lifted dimension, matrix of data-derived lifted modes, and its jth mode. 

aj (ℓ), aℓ, Ar Scalar modal coefficient, reduced-coordinate vector at the ℓth serialized-delay position, and coefficient matrix. 

Mr , nmem , θ, ηℓ Data-driven reduced evolution law, its memory length and identified parameters, and reduced-model discrepancy. 

Continued on next page 

2Table 1 (continued) 

Symbol or abbreviation Description 

Er , CR r Lifted finite-horizon reconstruction error and nominal factor-storage compression ratio of an r-dimensional model. 

S, sk, F∆t Unknown state space, state at tk, and one-step nonlinear evolution map. 

Sser , σℓ, Fser Augmented channel-state space, its ℓth serialized state, and the one-entry serialized shift map. 

g, gser , hq Centered physical measurement observable, scalar serialized observable, and q-component delay observable. 

Gser , Kser , K(q)ser Invariant observable space of the serialized map, its scalar Koopman composition operator, and componentwise action on q-vector observables. 

Dq , GHq Serialized Hankel delay-lifting operator on observables and the finite delay-observable space generated by gser .

φj , λj , Φj Serialized Koopman eigenfunction, its eigenvalue, and the associated lifted Koopman mode. 

NH = mN , xH = vec( X) Length of the serialized centered record and its columnwise vectorization; the m channel values at each sampling instant remain consecutive. 

q, K = NH − q + 1, Lq,K ,

Hq,K 

Imposed Hankel delay depth, number of Hankel columns, injective Hankel lifting operator, and its NH -dimensional range. 

hℓ, H, H0, H1 Delay vector of the serialized record, scalar-entry Hankel matrix, and the two one-serialized-index-shifted Hankel matrices. 

p = rank( H0) Data-supported lifted dimension returned by the economy-size SVD; reduced order is defined by retaining 

r < p modal triplets. 

Up, Σp, Vp Economy-size SVD factors of H0 restricted to its positive singular spectrum. 

˜Kp p × p finite-data least-squares approximation of the Koopman operator on the data-supported delay subspace. 

˜λ, v Eigenvalue and eigenvector of the finite-dimensional Koopman approximation ˜Kp.

KH Matrix representation of the exact Koopman restriction in Hankel delay coordinates. 

Gp = ˜KH 

> p

˜Kp Self-adjoint positive-semidefinite Koopman energy operator. 

μj , qj , Q, ΛG Eigenvalues and orthonormal eigenvectors of Gp, the eigenvector matrix, and the diagonal eigenvalue matrix. 

tj = ( μj , ϕj , cT 

> j

) jth Koopman-energy modal triplet: energy-operator eigenvalue, associated energy mode, and its temporal coefficient row. 

Continued on next page 

3Table 1 (continued) 

Symbol or abbreviation Description Φ, ϕj , C, cT 

> j

Hankel–Koopman energy-mode matrix, its jth mode, delay-space coefficient matrix, and corresponding temporal coefficient row. 

L Finite operator horizon over which energetic persistence is accumulated. 

P (L) 

> j

, αj , E(L) 

> j

Persistence factor, coefficient energy, and finite-horizon modal energy of the jth Hankel–Koopman energy mode. 

JL(C) Accumulated quadratic Hankel–Koopman energy over operator horizon L.

π, ρ(L) 

> r

, η Permutation that orders modes by decreasing energy, cumulative energy fraction, and prescribed energy-retention level. 

Φr , Cr ,̂ Hr First r energy-ranked modes, their coefficient matrix, and the corresponding reduced Hankel reconstruction. 

ΛG,r , Tr Selected energy-eigenvalue matrix and the rank-r

Koopman-energy candidate Tr = ( ΛG,r , Φr , Cr ). 

εr , γr , χr = r/p Relative Hankel reconstruction error, matrix cosine similarity, and dimension ratio for candidate order r.

R, Radm Set of candidate triplet cardinalities (reduced dimensions) and its computationally admissible subset. 

F (r), F1(r), F2(r), βdim Vector-valued Pareto objective, its two components, and the weak dimensionality-penalty coefficient. 

P, C Pareto-optimal set and the final candidate set used in the scalar selection problem. 

rmin , rmax , rtar Minimum, maximum, and preferred reduced dimensions used in the soft dimension-selection rule. 

J(r), αdim , r⋆ Final normalized selection score, dimension-preference weight, and cardinality of the selected Koopman-energy candidate. 

Jℓ, νℓ Scalar Hankel anti-diagonal index set associated with serialized entry ℓ and its multiplicity νℓ = |J ℓ|.̂

x H,ℓ ,̂ X,̂ Y Recovered serialized centered entry, centered channel matrix obtained by inverse reshaping, and recovered measurement matrix after restoring the reference state. 

Tstart , IH , NI , NH, I , KI First calibration time, global calibration-index set, number of physical samples, length NH, I = mN I of the local serialized record, and number KI = NH, I − q + 1 of local Hankel columns, respectively. The subscript I denotes restriction to 

IH .

YI , HI , CI , cI,k Measured data, serialized-data Hankel matrix, selected coefficient matrix, and temporal coefficient vector associated with the finite calibration window. 

Continued on next page 

4Table 1 (continued) 

Symbol or abbreviation Description 

CI , HI , YI Hankel coefficient space, local Hankel-matrix space, and physical measurement space associated with the calibration window TH , respectively. 

˜CI (Bα), ˜cI,k Free-run coefficient matrix [ ˜cI,1, . . . , ˜cI,K I ] and its kth coefficient vector, obtained by fixing the initial coefficient vectors to the prescribed data-derived values and applying the coupled NLARX model recursively in CI .

α = ( na, n b, n k), ℓα, dα,

pα, Mα

NLARX order triple, required initial-history length, stacked regressor-input dimension, nonlinear feature dimension, and number of observation-driven transitions, respectively. 

ϕα, γα,k , Bα, Kα Fixed nonlinear feature map, NLARX regressor, multi-output parameter matrix, and its admissible parameter set. 

SI,α, AI , RI,α Recursive coefficient simulator, scalar anti-diagonal recovery followed by inverse reshaping, and complete finite-window reconstruction operator in the experimental variables. 

λreg , JI,λ reg Regularization parameter and physical-space inverse-calibration functional evaluated after modal and anti-diagonal reconstruction. 

JI,0, ρI , LI Unregularized reconstruction-error term, bound on its possible negative curvature, and sensitivity bound of its parameter gradient to perturbations of the calibration data. 

ΓI,α, C+

> I,α

, QI,α, Bλ, α Observed-data-driven nonlinear regressor matrix and corresponding target coefficient matrix, fixed-structure Tikhonov functional, and its unique minimizer. 

AI , STik , fI , PI ,

{wj }4

> j=1

, Ψ I

Finite family of feasible NLARX structures, Tikhonov structure score, vector of post-reconstruction physical-space selection objectives, Pareto-optimal subset, positive decision weights, and final Pareto decision score. ̂

Ufor Reconstructed physical experimental-channel inputs supplied to the recursive quantity-of-interest model on Tfor .

QI, qk, ξk Channel-dependent scalar quantity-of-interest, its sampled value, and unresolved quantity-response error. 

μQ, σQ, μU , σU Quantity-of-interest and channel normalization statistics on the finite observation horizon. 

β = ( nQa , n Qb , n Qk ), ℓβ , dβ ,

pβ

Quantity-of-interest NLARX order triple, required history length, stacked regressor dimension, and nonlinear feature dimension. 

θλQ,β , BQ, PQ, SQ Regularized scalar NLARX parameter vector, finite feasible order family, Pareto-optimal subset, and correlation-primary final decision score. 

Continued on next page 

5Table 1 (continued) 

Symbol or abbreviation Description 

F⋆Q,h , RQ/ for = NQ/N f Selected one-step numerical operator for the quantity-of-interest and the identification-to-forecast ratio, respectively. ArDMD Adaptive Randomized Dynamic Mode Decomposition. cDMD Compressed Dynamic Mode Decomposition. csDMD Compressed-sensing Dynamic Mode Decomposition. DMD Dynamic Mode Decomposition. DMDc Dynamic Mode Decomposition with control. DTM Data-Twin Model. EDMD Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposition. Hankel-DMD Hankel Dynamic Mode Decomposition. HAVOK Hankel Alternative View of Koopman. HKFED Hankel–Koopman Finite-horizon Energy Decomposition. KROD Randomized Koopman Orthogonal Decomposition. MAE Mean absolute error. mpEDMD Measure-preserving Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposition. mrDMD Multiresolution Dynamic Mode Decomposition. NLARX Nonlinear autoregressive model with exogenous inputs. optDMD Optimized Dynamic Mode Decomposition. piDMD Physics-informed Dynamic Mode Decomposition. PV Photovoltaic. rDMD Randomized Dynamic Mode Decomposition. ResDMD Residual Dynamic Mode Decomposition. RMSE Root mean square error. SVD Singular value decomposition. 

# 1 Introduction 

An experimental record rarely presents its dynamics in a ready-made form. Each sensor observes one part of the process, and the behavior of interest emerges from the way these measurements evolve together. Across a finite experimental record, that behavior may be shared among several channels, distributed across different time scales, and influenced by effects that become visible only after a delay. The central question is therefore how to turn a finite collection of measurements into a compact dynamical description that can be interpreted, advanced in time, returned to the measurement space, and ultimately used for forecasting. Several well-established ideas contribute to this task. Koopman operator theory [1– 7] describes nonlinear dynamics through the linear evolution of observable quantities. Reduced-order modeling [8–16] provides a compact set of coordinates, and nonlinear system identification [17–21] supplies an evolution law for those coordinates. Numerical techniques for modal decomposition like Proper Orthogonal Decomposition (POD) 6and Dynamic Mode Decomposition (DMD) [22–30] extract coherent patterns and their temporal signatures directly from data. Hankel representations [31–33] bring the recent history of the measurements into the analysis, while newly AI-driven methodologies for digital twins [34–41] may connect these elements to a measured physical process. Situated at the intersection of these areas, the present work follows the com-plete path from experimental measurements to finite-horizon forecasting. To place the novel construction in context, the following discussion traces the main ideas that led to it. Following the organization proposed by Colbrook [42], the modal decompo-sition algorithms are viewed through three broad perspectives: regression, Galerkin approximation, and preservation of dynamical structure. 

## 1.1 Foundational Developments in Data-Driven Dynamical Modeling 

The modal decomposition research advanced with Koopman’s 1931 observation [1] that a dynamical system can be studied through the evolution of functions defined on its state space. These functions are called observables because they represent quantities that can be evaluated, and often measured, along a trajectory. The state dynamics may be nonlinear; instead the operator that advances the observables is linear. Koopman and von Neumann [2] soon extended this viewpoint to systems with continuous spectra. The linear description lives in a function space that is generally infinite dimensional, which makes its spectral information both rich and computationally challenging. In 2005, Mezić [5] developed the modern spectral interpretation of this idea and connected Koopman eigenvalues, eigenfunctions, and modes with nonlinear dynamics and model reduction. Rowley, Mezić, Bagheri, Schlatter, and Henningson [21] showed how this perspective could reveal coherent structures in nonlinear fluid flows. In the period 2008-2010, Schmid and Sesterhenn [22, 23] introduced Dynamic Mode Decom-position (DMD) as a systematic numerical algorithm for extracting such structures from numerical or experimental snapshots. The method associates each spatial mode with a temporal behavior, so that oscillation, growth, and decay can be read directly from data. The main idea of DMD consists in organizing data in two collections of measure-ments. The first contains the centered snapshots up to time tN −1, and the second contains their one-step successors: 

X0 = [x1 · · · xN −1

] , X1 = [x2 · · · xN

] . (1) Classical DMD seeks a linear map that carries the earlier snapshots in X0 to the later snapshots in X1. Its modes describe coherent patterns in the measurements, and its eigenvalues describe how those patterns change from one sampling instant to the next. This simple construction opened several natural directions of development. One direction asks how the entire time record can contribute to the estimated dynamics. Chen, Tu, and Rowley [43] answered this question in 2012 with Opti-mized Dynamic Mode Decomposition (optDMD), which treats the snapshots as a global exponential fitting problem. Askham and Kutz [44] later made this formulation computationally practical through variable projection. A second direction concerns 7data that are available only through a smaller number of measurements. Tu, Rowley, Luchtenburg, Brunton, and Kutz [45] provided an early link between compressed mea-surements and DMD. Brunton, Proctor, Tu, and Kutz [46] subsequently developed Compressed Dynamic Mode Decomposition (cDMD) and Compressed-Sensing Dynamic Mode Decomposition (csDMD), showing how full-state modes can be recovered from compressed or spatially subsampled data. Large snapshot matrices also motivated the use of randomized linear algebra. The singular value decomposition (SVD), which identifies the dominant low-dimensional range of the data, is often the most expensive step in the classical computation. Erichson and Donovan [47] introduced the randomized SVD in their 2016 Randomized Low-Rank Dynamic Mode Decomposition for motion detection and video background separation. In 2017, Bistrian and Navon [48] introduced Adaptive Randomized Dynamic Mode Decomposition (ArDMD) into fluid-dynamics reduced-order modeling through a non-intrusive model for two-dimensional flows. Erichson, Mathelin, Kutz, and Brunton [49] then developed the fully sketched rDMD algorithm in 2019: the main computation takes place in a reduced-dimensional range, and the resulting modes are finally returned to the original measurement space. Other extensions respond to the structure of the experiment itself. When slow and fast processes coexist, Multiresolution Dynamic Mode Decomposition (mrDMD) organizes their modal content over a hierarchy of temporal windows, as proposed by Kutz, Fu, and Brunton [50]. When the measurements are influenced by known inputs, Dynamic Mode Decomposition with Control (DMDc), introduced by Proctor, Brunton, and Kutz [25], identifies the autonomous evolution together with the effect of actuation. Table 2 gathers these regression-oriented developments and the questions they were designed to address.      

> Table 2 : Regression-, compression-, multiresolution-, and control-oriented members of the DMD class.
> Method Pioneering authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role
> Classical DMD Koopman interpretation by Rowley, Mezić, Bagheri, Schlatter, and Henningson (2009) [21]; classical DMD by Schmid (2010) [23]. Reduced SVD of X0,projection of X1X†
> 0,and eigendecomposition of the projected operator. Extraction of coherent modes, growth or decay rates, and oscillation frequencies from consecutive snapshots. Optimized DMD (optDMD) Chen, Tu, and Rowley (2012) [43]; variable-projection formulation by Askham and Kutz (2018) [44]. Joint exponential fitting of the complete snapshot sequence through nonlinear variable projection. Global estimation of modal parameters from the available temporal record.

8Table 2 (continued) 

Method Pioneering authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role 

Compressed DMD (cDMD) and compressed-sensing DMD (csDMD) Compressed-measurement connection by Tu et al. (2014) [45]; cDMD and csDMD by Brunton, Proctor, Tu, and Kutz (2016) [46]. DMD on compressed measurements followed by full-state mode recovery from available snapshots or a sparse representation. Modal identification from compressed or spatially subsampled measurements. Randomized DMD (rDMD) and Adaptive Randomized DMD (ArDMD) Erichson and Donovan (2016) [47]; Bistrian and Navon (2017) [48]; fully sketched rDMD by Erichson, Mathelin, Kutz, and Brunton (2019) [49]. Randomized low-rank range construction, spectral computation in that range, and recovery of modes in measurement space. Efficient low-rank DMD for video data, fluid-flow reduced-order models, and high-dimensional snapshot records. Multiresolution DMD (mrDMD) Kutz, Fu, and Brunton (2016) [50]. Recursive partition of the observation interval and hierarchical extraction of modal content across temporal scales. Localization and separation of multiscale dynamical behavior. DMD with control (DMDc) Proctor, Brunton, and Kutz (2016) [25]. Augmentation of state snapshots with input history and simultaneous identification of state and actuation operators. Identification of autonomous evolution and measured actuation. 

Regression between successive state snapshots is the interpretation on which DMD algorithm is based. Koopman theory suggests a broader question: which observable quantities should be followed so that the dynamics become easier to describe? Williams, Kevrekidis, and Rowley [51] addressed this question in 2015 through Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposition (EDMD). EDMD evaluates a chosen dictionary of nonlinear observables on the measured state and builds a Galerkin approximation of the Koopman operator in the space spanned by that dictionary. The choice of observables therefore becomes part of the model. The observables may also include the recent history of a measurement. A delay coordinate records the present value together with selected past values, so it can reveal information that is only partially visible in a single snapshot. When these delayed measurements are arranged in a Hankel matrix, the shift from one column to the next represents the advance of the observation window. Arbabi and Mezić [32] placed Hankel Dynamic Mode Decomposition (Hankel-DMD) on an ergodic-theoretic foundation and connected delay embedding with Krylov subspaces and Koopman spectral computation. 9In the same year, Steven L. Brunton, Bingni W. Brunton, Proctor, Kaiser, and Kutz [33] introduced the Hankel Alternative View of Koopman (HAVOK). HAVOK uses the leading delay coordinates to form an approximately linear model and interprets a low-energy coordinate as a forcing term for intermittent behavior. A finite observable dictionary produces a finite matrix approximation of an oper-ator that acts on an infinite-dimensional space. This observation leads to another practical question: how can a computed spectral quantity be verified? Colbrook and Townsend [52] answered it through a residual framework that measures the error asso-ciated with a candidate Koopman eigenvalue and eigenfunction. Colbrook, Ayton, and Szőke [53] developed Residual Dynamic Mode Decomposition (ResDMD) for robust spectral computation in fluid-dynamical applications. The required residual is obtained from additional quadratic information computed from the snapshots and supports verified approximations of spectra, pseudospectra, and spectral measures. Table 3 brings together these observable-based Galerkin, Hankel delay-coordinate, and residual developments.    

> Table 3 : Galerkin-, Hankel-, and residual-oriented members of the DMD class.
> Method Pioneering authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role
> Extended DMD (EDMD) Williams, Kevrekidis, and Rowley (2015) [51]. Evaluation of a nonlinear observable dictionary on paired snapshots and Galerkin approximation through empirical Gram and cross-correlation matrices. Finite-dimensional approximation of Koopman action in a prescribed observable space. Hankel-DMD Arbabi and Mezić (2017) [32]. Construction of time-delay observables and application of DMD or EDMD to a shifted Hankel pair. Koopman spectral analysis in a delay-enriched Krylov-type observable space. Hankel Alternative View of Koopman (HAVOK) Steven L. Brunton, Bingni W. Brunton, Proctor, Kaiser, and Kutz (2017) [33]. Hankel SVD followed by identification of a linear model for the leading delay coordinates, with a selected low-energy coordinate acting as forcing. Structured representation of intermittent and chaotic dynamics.

10 Table 3 (continued)   

> Method Pioneering authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role
> Residual DMD (ResDMD) Colbrook and Townsend (2023) [52]; fluid-dynamical formulation by Colbrook, Ayton, and Szőke (2023) [53]. Augmentation of EDMD with snapshot-derived quadratic information and evaluation of residuals associated with the full Koopman operator. Verification of spectral candidates and approximation of spectra, pseudospectra, and spectral measures.

Many physical systems come with valuable structural information. Conservation laws, symmetries, local interactions, causality, and invariance under spatial shifts can all guide the fitted evolution. Baddoo, Herrmann, McKeon, Kutz, and Brunton [54] incorporated such information through Physics-Informed Dynamic Mode Decomposi-tion (piDMD) in 2023. Their formulation restricts the DMD regression to a matrix manifold that represents the selected physical property. Measure preservation provides a particularly important example. For a measure-preserving system, the Koopman operator acts as an isometry in the appropriate inner product. Colbrook [55] built this property into Measure-Preserving Extended Dynamic Mode Decomposition (mpEDMD), producing finite-dimensional approxima-tions with convergent spectral behavior. In 2025, Bistrian [56] connected structure, reduction, and interpretability through the Randomized Koopman Orthogonal Decom-position (KROD). This method combines randomized projection, innovative orthogonal Koopman modes, Pareto-based selection of the reduced dimension, and explainable deep learning within a data-driven twin methodology. These structure-preserving and interpretable developments are summarized in Table 4.    

> Table 4 : Structure-preserving and explainable data-driven developments related to the DMD class.
> Method Pioneering authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role
> Physics-informed DMD (piDMD) Baddoo, Herrmann, McKeon, Kutz, and Brunton (2023) [54]. Solution of the DMD regression on a matrix manifold encoding selected physical properties. Preservation of conservation laws, symmetry, localization, causality, or shift equivariance in the identified operator. Measure-preserving EDMD (mpEDMD) Colbrook (2023) [55]. Construction of the empirical Gram metric and enforcement of its preservation by the observable-space approximation. Isometric Koopman approximation and convergent spectral computation for measure-preserving systems.

11 Table 4 (continued)    

> Method Pioneering authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role
> Randomized Koopman Orthogonal Decomposi-tion (KROD) and explainable deep learning Bistrian (2025) [56]. Randomized orthogonal projection, construction of orthogonal Koopman modes, Pareto selection of the reduced dimension, and nonlinear autoregressive identification of modal dynamics with exogenous inputs. Interpretable nonlinear evolution and adaptive prediction of reduced-order data-driven twin models

Seen together, the three classes described above provide increasingly expressive ways to read dynamics from data. Dynamic Mode Decomposition supplies modes and their temporal signatures. Extended and Hankel formulations enrich the quantities being observed. Residual and structure-preserving formulations add verification and physical consistency. At this point, the data have acquired a compact set of coordinates. The next advancement in modeling data concerns motion in those coordinates: how the reduced state evolves, how external measurements influence that evolution, and how the resulting model can support prediction. Accordingly, we extend the organizational perspective of Colbrook [42] beyond modal decomposition, to encompass nonlinear input–output identification, reduced-order prediction, Koopman-autoencoder architectures, and data-driven twin modeling. Reduced-order modeling provides the computational setting to the domain of nonlinear system identification. Seminal work of Ljung [57] established the general framework for the prediction and identification of dynamical input-output models. Nelles [58] developed nonlinear identification architectures based on polynomial, neural-network, fuzzy, and related representations, and Billings [59] gave a comprehensive treatment of nonlinear autoregressive moving-average models with exogenous inputs. Within this family, a Nonlinear Autoregressive model with Exogenous inputs (NLARX) expresses the current output as a nonlinear function of past outputs and past external inputs. The delayed values provide memory, the external inputs transmit information from coupled variables, and recursive simulation advances the model across a finite horizon. These features make NLARX models well suited to the evolution of reduced temporal coefficients and to the prediction of quantities that depend on several measured channels. Benner, Gugercin, and Willcox [60] surveyed projection-based methods that use low-dimensional trial and test spaces for repeated simulation, optimization, control, and uncertainty quantification. In a data-driven setting, the relevant subspace is learned directly from the available snapshots, and Hankel lifting can enrich that subspace with 12 temporal history. The reduced representation supplies the model coordinates, and a predictive method then specifies how those coordinates evolve. A complementary advancement in nonlinear system identification emerged from the integration of deep learning with Koopman operator theory. Takeishi, Kawahara, and Yairi [61] introduced neural-network learning of Koopman-invariant observables, while Lusch, Kutz, and Brunton [62] and Otto and Rowley [63] developed autoencoder-based architectures that combine nonlinear coordinate transformations with approximately linear latent dynamics. Azencot, Erichson, Lin, and Mahoney [64] subsequently intro-duced the consistent Koopman autoencoder, which couples the forward and backward latent evolution operators to support robust multi-step forecasting. The final connection brings the reduced description back to the physical process represented by the measurements. This connection lies at the heart of digital-twin modeling. In a published AIAA contribution from January 2020, Kapteyn, Knezevic, and Willcox [65] constructed a predictive digital twin from a library of component-based reduced-order models representing pristine and damaged structural states. An optimal classification tree processed sensor measurements and identified the reduced model that best represented the current asset. The physics-based reduced models supplied the predictive dynamics; interpretable machine learning supplied the model-selection and updating rule. Kapteyn, Knezevic, Huynh, Tran, and Willcox [66] developed the corresponding Bayesian formulation in an article first published online on 20 May 2020 and later assigned to a 2022 journal issue. Bayesian state estimation used the observations to determine the most plausible candidates within the component-based reduced-model library. In 2021, Kapteyn, Pretorius, and Willcox [67] represented the coupled digital-twin system through a probabilistic graphical model that unified state evolution, observations, updating, prediction, and decisions. In 2022, Kapteyn and Willcox [68] extended this line to sensor placement and dynamic sensor scheduling through predictive reduced-order models and interpretable classification trees. Across this sequence, the reduced physics-based models carry the predictive dynamics, and data-driven inference estimates the physical-asset state, updates the twin, and supports sensing decisions. In contrast to the architecture of Kapteyn et al. [66], in which observational data are used to estimate the state of a physical asset and to update its digital twin by selecting appropriate physics-based reduced models from a predefined library, Bistrian [69] introduced a distinct, fully data-driven route in 2022. The Data-Twin Model (DTM) was defined as a reduced-complexity representation constructed to mirror the behavior of the original process. Within this non-intrusive framework, the reduced data-twin representation was extracted directly from data snapshots through randomized Dynamic Mode Decomposition. A neural-network Nonlinear AutoRegressive model with eXogenous inputs (NLARX) was then identified to learn the nonlinear evolution law of the retained temporal coefficients. Recursive simulation advanced these reduced coordinates in time, after which modal reconstruction recovered the corresponding high-fidelity response in the original data space. Thus, machine learning did not merely estimate the state of an existing physics-based twin; it supplied and recursively simulated the evolution law of the reduced data-driven state itself. This work introduced an early integration of randomized modal reduction, neural-network 13 identification, recursive reduced-coordinate simulation, and full-state reconstruction within a non-intrusive reduced-order data-twin framework for fluid dynamics. The resulting sequence from reduced coordinates to nonlinear prediction and data-twin construction forms a fourth methodological class, summarized in Table 5. 

Table 5 : Selected foundational developments in nonlinear input-output identification, reduced-order prediction, Koopman-autoencoder architec-tures, and data-driven twin modeling. 

Method Foundational authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role 

Nonlinear dynamical input-output identification Ljung (1999) [57], Nelles (2001) [58], Billings (2013) [59]. Representation of the current output by a nonlinear map of delayed outputs and delayed exogenous inputs, followed by recursive simulation. Identification and finite-horizon prediction of coupled reduced coordinates. Projection-based reduced-order modeling Benner, Gugercin, and Willcox (2015) [60]. Projection of high-dimensional dynamics onto low-dimensional trial and test spaces. Efficient repeated simulation, optimization, control, and uncertainty quantification. Koopman-autoencoder modeling Takeishi, Kawahara, and Yairi (2017) [61]; Lusch, Kutz, and Brunton (2018) [62]; Otto and Rowley (2019) [63]; Azencot, Erichson, Lin, and Mahoney (2020) [64]. Neural-network learning of Koopman observables and nonlinear encoding-decoding maps with approximately linear latent dynamics, subsequently extended through forward-backward consistency. Low-dimensional representation, reconstruction, and multi-step forecasting of nonlinear dynamical systems. Data-driven physics-based digital twins Kapteyn, Knezevic, and Willcox (2020) [65]; Kapteyn, Pretorius, and Willcox (2021) [67]; Kapteyn, Knezevic, Huynh, Tran, and Willcox (2022) [66]; Kapteyn and Willcox (2022) [68]. Interpretable classification or Bayesian state estimation maps sensor observations to candidate component-based reduced models; a probabilistic graphical representation organizes digital-twin evolution and updating. Physics-based prediction, structural-state estimation, digital-twin updating, and design of sensing strategies. 

14 Table 5 (continued)    

> Method Foundational authors and chronology Defining operation Principal role
> Data-Twin Models (DTMs) with temporal deep learning Bistrian (2022) [69]. Non-intrusive randomized modal reduction followed by neural-network-based NLARX identification and recursive simulation of the temporal coefficients. Reduced-order data-twin modeling in which machine learning efficiently supplies the temporal evolution of high-fidelity dynamics.

The pioneering developments summarized above established the principal founda-tions of advanced Dynamic Mode Decomposition: data-driven modal representation, observable enrichment, preservation of dynamical structure, reduced-coordinate identi-fication, and data-twin construction. Together, they lead to a more demanding question: how can these elements be assembled into a single mathematically well-posed work-flow that begins with coupled experimental measurements, identifies their nonlinear reduced evolution, returns that evolution to the measurement space, and ends with a finite-horizon forecast of a physical quantity-of-interest? This question motivates the unresolved methodological gap examined in the present work. 

## 1.2 The Unresolved Methodological Gap 

At the level of finite data, the common outcome of modal decomposition is a low-rank factorization of the measurement matrix into a modal basis and a matrix of temporal coefficients. Equivalently, each measured state is represented as a linear combination of modes multiplied by time-dependent coefficients [70]. This representation reveals coher-ent structures, dominant directions, and characteristic temporal signatures. Several members of the DMD class also associate these coordinates with a finite-dimensional linear or Koopman-based evolution operator. These achievements provide the reduced coordinates required for modeling. The identification of a closed nonlinear evolution law for those coordinates forms a distinct subsequent task, which is not often addressed by researchers. This distinction becomes particularly important for strongly nonlinear, multichannel experimental data. Thus, the passage from decomposition to forecasting requires both a reduced representation and an identified nonlinear evolution mechanism. A broad forecasting literature treats measured quantities directly as time series and constructs future values from their recent histories and available inputs [71–75]. Such methods are effective for many short-term prediction problems. For strongly nonlinear multichannel processes, however, direct forecasting may propagate noise and redundant information, while the relevant cross-channel interactions remain implicit in a high-dimensional input space. The selection of time delays, forecast inputs, and recursive prediction rules becomes increasingly demanding, and small local errors may accumulate across the forecast horizon. These bottlenecks motivate the need for a 15 reduced dynamical representation that preserves the dominant coupled information before forecasting a physical quantity-of-interest. A substantial body of forecasting research employs deep-learning architectures that learn internal spatiotemporal representations directly from historical physical-state variables and exogenous driver data [76–80]. These representations can provide strong predictive capability, while the dynamical path from observations to forecasts is often distributed across the network architecture, its parameters, and the training procedure. This structure limits physical interpretation, mathematical analysis, and scientifically informed intervention. An explainable reduced-order framework can instead employ deep learning as an identification tool while keeping the reduced variables, their nonlinear evolution, their cross-channel coupling, and their contribution to the final forecast accessible for examination. The unresolved gap consequently concerns a unified finite-horizon methodology that connects four operations within one mathematically justified construction: reduced-order decomposition of measurements, identification and recursive simulation of their nonlinear dynamics in reduced-coordinate space, inverse reconstruction and candidate assessment in the physical measurement space, and finally, forecasting a measurement-dependent physical quantity-of-interest. Such a methodology also requires explicit conditions for existence, uniqueness, stability, model selection, and finite-horizon propagation. These requirements define the gap addressed by the twin modeling and forecasting framework developed in the present paper. 

## 1.3 Motivation for the Unified Three-Phase Framework 

The unified three-phase framework proposed in this paper is needed because the analysis continues beyond the decomposition of experimental data and develops a complete path from measurements to prediction. The first stage constructs a reduced representation of coupled multichannel observations and identifies their dominant energetic structures. The second stage equips the retained temporal coefficients with an identified nonlinear evolution law and returns the lifted-space dynamics to the measurement space, where the reconstructed physical channels determine the inverse-calibration scores. The third stage transfers this information to the finite-horizon forecast of a physical quantity-of-interest. These three modeling phases therefore form a connected computational methodology in which the output of each phase provides a mathematically defined input to the next one. The principal novelty of this work is the unified finite-horizon coupling of three mathematically defined phases. Phase I introduces the Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition (HKFED) , which constructs orthogonal Hankel–Koopman energy directions and ranks linked spectral–spatial–temporal triplets according to finite-horizon energy and persistence. Phase II introduces an inverse-calibrated coupled multi-output NLARX methodology , in which the nonlinear dynamics are identified and simulated in Hankel coefficient space, while candidate selection is performed after inverse Hankel reconstruction in the physical measurement space. Phase III uses an established finite-horizon recursive NLARX forecasting structure, but introduces within the present workflow the transfer mechanism by which the physical channel trajecto-ries reconstructed in Phase II become the exogenous drivers of the quantity-of-interest 16 forecast. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, this complete path from serialized multichannel measurements, through HKFED reduction and inverse-calibrated non-linear dynamics, to channel-driven forecasting has not previously been formulated. The principal methodological contribution therefore lies in the mathematically explicit interfaces between the three phases and in their assembly into a unified, reproducible data-driven twin methodology. Within the proposed framework, deep learning identifies nonlinear dynamics inside a structured reduced-order model. The reduced variables, cross-channel coupling, and contributions to the forecast remain accessible to physical interpretation and mathematical analysis through explicit interfaces among decomposition, reduced-order simulation, measurement reconstruction, and forecasting. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the math-ematical background, encompassing the Hankel-lifted reduced-order modeling of finite-horizon experimental data and the Koopman operator framework in the Hankel-lifted space. Section 3 develops the computational aspects of the proposed methodology, describes its three phases and associated algorithms, and supports each phase with a mathematical analysis addressing the relevant existence, uniqueness, and finite-horizon stability properties of the resulting computational models. Section 4 reports the numerical experiments and evaluates the performance of the complete framework. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the principal contributions and findings of the proposed methodology and presents the main conclusions. 

# 2 Mathematical Background 

## 2.1 Hankel-Lifted Reduced-Order Modeling of Finite-Horizon Experimental Data 

Experimental measurements frequently produce large, multivariate data sets. High sampling rates, long finite records and multiple sensors may lead to data matrices whose direct processing, model identification and forecasting are computationally demanding. Moreover, measured channels are generally correlated because they reflect the evolution of a comparatively small number of coherent physical mechanisms. These motivates the construction of a reduced-order representation that retains the dominant information contained in the measurements while replacing the full data-supported dynamics by a selected set of modal coordinates. In this setting, reduced-order modeling is not used to approximate a prescribed governing equation; rather, it identifies a spectrally truncated representation directly from the available experimental observations.                                 

> Definition 1 (Finite modeling horizon, calibration window, observation horizon, and forecast horizon) Let the complete experimental record contain Nuniformly spaced sampling instants
> tk=t0+ ( k−1)∆ t, k= 1 , . . . , N, ∆t > 0,(2) and define the finite modeling horizon by the finite sampled-time set
> Tfin ={tk:k= 1 , . . . , N },Tfin =tN−t1= ( N−1)∆ t < ∞.(3) The complete experimental record is indexed by Tfin .

17 Let 1 ≤ NQ < N be the number of paired experimental quantity–channel samples used for identification and define the finite observation horizon 

Tobs = {tk : k = 1 , . . . , N Q}, Tobs = tNQ − t1 = ( NQ − 1)∆ t. (4) The finite calibration window begins at the next sampling instant, ns = NQ + 1, and, for a prescribed number H ∈ N0 of calibration intervals satisfying ns + H ≤ N , is 

TH = {tk : k = ns, . . . , n s + H}, TFH = H∆t. (5) For a prescribed Nf ∈ N0 satisfying Nf ≤ H + 1, the finite forecast horizon is 

Tfor = {tNQ+h : h = 1 , . . . , N f }, Tf = Nf ∆t, (6) with Tfor = ∅ when Nf = 0. Consequently, the four temporal sets satisfy 

Tobs ∪ T for ⊆ T fin , TH ⊆ T fin , Tfor ⊆ T H ,

Tobs ∩ T H = ∅, max Tobs < min TH . (7) 

Throughout this work, a finite horizon T• denotes the finite temporal domain represented by its sampled-time set. Its duration is denoted by T•, whereas the corresponding number of samples, forecast steps, or calibration intervals is denoted by an integer such as N , NQ, Nf , or H.Accordingly, all decomposition, identification, inverse-calibration, reconstruction, stability, and forecasting statements established in this work apply to prescribed finite sets of sampled times contained in Tfin ; they do not imply global or asymptotic validity as t → ∞ .Let 

yk = y(tk) + εk ∈ Fm, tk ∈ T fin , k = 1 , . . . , N, (8) denote the measurement vector recorded at time tk, where F = R or C, m is the number of measured variables, and εk represents measurement noise and unresolved effects. In the notation of Definition 1, these measurements constitute the complete experimental record on the finite modeling horizon Tfin . They are assembled columnwise in the snapshot matrix 

Y = [y1 y2 · · · yN

] ∈ Fm×N . (9) The measurement space is endowed with the Euclidean inner product 

⟨v, w⟩ = vHw, v, w ∈ Fm, (10) where ( ·)H denotes the conjugate transpose. The induced norm is 

∥v∥2 = √⟨v, v⟩. (11) For a data matrix Z = [ z1, . . . , zN ], define the finite-horizon data norm by 

∥Z∥2 

> F

=

> N

∑

> k=1

∥zk∥22. (12) 18 Consequently, the role played by a continuous L2 norm in equation-based modeling is assumed here by a discrete, finite-horizon Frobenius norm defined directly on the experimental observations. To separate the mean operating condition from the measured fluctuations, introduce a reference vector ¯ y ∈ Fm, for example the temporal mean, and define 

xk = yk − ¯y, X = [x1 · · · xN

] . (13) If centering is not required, one simply sets ¯ y = 0.The centered multichannel record is serialized in form 

xH = vec( X) = [xT 

> 1

· · · xT

> N

]T = [xH, 1 · · · xH,N H

]T , NH = mN. (14) Thus, the m centered channel values at each sampling instant remain consecutive in a fixed order, while successive sampling instants are concatenated chronologically. In case m ≪ N , a decomposition performed directly on X ∈ Fm×N is restricted by rank( X) ≤ m, irrespective of the length of the available temporal record. It was proved in [32] that organizing data into block-Hankel matrices of multiple observables transfers the analysis to a Hankel-lifted space, whose row dimension is determined by the imposed delay depth rather than by the small number of measured channels. The present work introduces the scalar-entry serialization of a multichannel snapshot matrix and shows that serializing X and organizing xH into delay coordinates preserves all measured entries while enabling the representation of a richer set of data-supported temporal directions. The full lifted dynamics can then be replaced by selected Hankel modal coordinates that suppress redundant or weakly contributing directions while retaining the dominant finite-horizon temporal–energetic content required for reconstruction and forecasting. Let q ∈ { 1, . . . , N H −1} be the imposed Hankel delay depth and set K = NH −q+1 ≥

2. The serialized delay vectors are 

hℓ = [xH,ℓ xH,ℓ +1 · · · xH,ℓ +q−1

]T ∈ Fq , ℓ = 1 , . . . , K, (15) and the corresponding lifted matrix is 

H = [h1 h2 · · · hK

] =



xH, 1 xH, 2 · · · xH,K 

xH, 2 xH, 3 · · · xH,K +1 

... ... . . . ...

xH,q xH,q +1 · · · xH,N H

 ∈ Fq×K . (16)                     

> Definition 2 (Finite-dimensional Hankel-lifted space) Let q, K ∈Nand set NH=q+K−1. The Hankel lifting operator of delay depth qis the linear map
> Lq,K :FNH−→ Fq×K,

[Lq,K (z)]           

> ij =zi+j−1,i= 1 , . . . , q, j= 1 , . . . , K, (17) where
> z= ( z1, . . . , z NH)⊤∈FNH

19 is a generic scalar sequence. The corresponding finite-dimensional Hankel-lifted space is the range, or image, of Lq,K :

Hq,K := range( Lq,K )=

{

Lq,K (z) : z ∈ FNH

}

=

{

Z ∈ Fq×K : Zij = zi+j−1 for z ∈ FNH , i=1 ,...,q, j=1 ,...,K 

}

.

(18) Thus, Hq,K consists of all q × K matrices whose entries are constant along each anti-diagonal. The operator Lq,K is injective because every component zℓ, ℓ = 1 , . . . , N H , occurs in at least one matrix entry satisfying i + j − 1 = ℓ. Since Lq,K is a linear isomorphism from FNH

onto its range, Hq,K is a linear subspace of Fq×K with dim Hq,K = NH = q + K − 1. (19) For the particular serialized experimental record xH defined in (14), setting z = xH gives 

H = Lq,K (xH ) ∈ Hq,K .

The two shifted matrices associated with the particular lifted matrix H are defined by 

H0 = [h1 · · · hK−1

] , H1 = [h2 · · · hK

] , H0, H1 ∈ Fq×(K−1) . (20) Thus, each column pair ( hℓ, hℓ+1 ) represents one observed shift in the serialized delay-coordinate space. Because vectorization and Lq,K are injective, the passage from X to H loses no measured entry. The Hankel row space is endowed with the Euclidean inner product, and the corresponding matrix space uses the Frobenius norm. 

Definition 3 (Hankel-lifted reduced-order model of finite-horizon experimental data) Let 

H ∈ Hq,K be the lifted representation of the centered experimental record on Tfin , and let 

p ≤ min {q, K } be the dimension of the data-supported lifted subspace on which the modal factorization is constructed. For 1 ≤ r ≤ p, an r-dimensional modal representation is 

H ≈̂ Hr = Ψr Ar ,

Ψr = [ψ1 · · · ψr

] ∈ Fq×r ,

Ar = [a1 · · · aK

] ∈ Fr×K .

(21) where the lifted modes satisfy 

ΨH 

> r

Ψr = Ir , (22) and aℓ = [ a1(ℓ), . . . , a r(ℓ)] T ∈ Fr is the reduced-coordinate vector associated with the ℓth Hankel column. For an orthogonal basis, the projected coefficients are 

aℓ = ΨH 

> r

hℓ, ℓ = 1 , . . . , K. (23) Their evolution along the serialized Hankel-column shifts may subsequently be represented by a data-driven model of the form 

aℓ+1 = Mr

(aℓ, aℓ−1, . . . , aℓ−nmem +1 ; θ) + ηℓ, (24) 

20 where nmem is the model memory length, θ contains the identified parameters, and ηℓ            

> represents model discrepancy. The representation (21) is required to achieve an acceptably small lifted-space relative reconstruction error
> Er=∥H−ΨrAr∥F
> ∥H∥F
> ,(25) while preserving the dynamical and statistical features relevant to identification and forecasting. The representation (21) is called reduced order when r < p ; hence the reduction is relative to the data-supported lifted subspace, not to the mmeasured physical channels.

The vectors ψj are data-derived structures in the q-dimensional Hankel row space, while the coefficients aj (ℓ) quantify their activation over the K serialized-delay posi-tions. Modal decomposition therefore separates recurrent lifted structures from their coefficients and recasts the modeling task in Fr. Although r may exceed the number 

m of measured channels, it remains a spectral truncation whenever r < p .The full lifted matrix contains qK scalar entries, whereas storing its two rank-r

factors requires qr + rK = r(q + K) entries. The corresponding nominal factor-storage compression ratio is CR r = qK r(q + K) . (26) Here CR r > 1 indicates entrywise storage compression of the lifted matrix by the two factors. This storage condition is distinct from, and is not required for, reduced-order modeling in the present framework: the latter is defined by the spectral truncation 

r < p . Computational efficiency arises primarily from evolving the selected coordinates and their finite-dimensional dynamics rather than from storing the factorization alone.  

> Remark 1 No initial or boundary conditions are imposed in this data-driven formulation, because the governing differential equations and their boundary operators are not assumed to be available. The initial reduced history is obtained directly by projecting the required first Hankel columns, whereas all admissibility, stability, and predictive properties are established from the finite-horizon data and from the identified reduced dynamics.

## 2.2 Koopman Operator Framework in the Hankel-Lifted Space 

Definition 3 formulates the reduced-order model directly in the Hankel-lifted space as ̂

Hr =

> r

∑

> j=1

ψj aT 

> j

= ΨrAr, (27) where aT 

> j

is the jth row of Ar. The theoretical question relevant to the present framework is therefore whether the serialized shift underlying H admits an opera-tor representation capable of providing precisely such a separation between modal structures and their time-dependent amplitudes. Introduced by Koopman in 1931, Koopman Operator Theory [1–3] supplies a suitable framework for this purpose and provides a rigorous mathematical framework 21 for the modal decomposition of nonlinear dynamical systems by representing their evolution through linear, generally infinite-dimensional operators acting on observables. Despite its early formulation, the theory remained largely theoretical for several decades. In 1985, Lasota and Mackey [81] renewed scientific interest in the original approach proposed by Koopman. In particular, they explicitly introduced and formalized the term “Koopman operator” in the literature, thereby contributing to the standardized nomenclature of this concept. This terminology was further reinforced in the second edition of their book [82], where the Koopman operator was studied as the adjoint of the Frobenius–Perron operator within a functional-analytic framework. At that time, however, computational resources were still insufficient for the numer-ical treatment of large-scale complex systems. The practical potential of Koopman Operator Theory began to be realized in the early 2000s. Its modern scientific revival was advanced by the pioneering work of Mezić and Banaszuk [4, 5], which established a foundation for data-driven modal decomposition. The seminal work of Mezić [5] introduced a rigorous spectral framework for analyzing nonlinear dynamical systems through Koopman operator theory, formalizing the spectral decomposition of observ-ables into Koopman eigenfunctions and modes. The spectral properties of the Koopman operator have subsequently been the subject of extensive investigation, as exemplified in [21, 43, 83]. In the present setting, no governing differential equation is assumed to be known. Let sk ∈ S denote the unknown physical state at tk and represent its one-sample evolution abstractly by 

sk+1 = F∆t(sk), k = 1 , . . . , N − 1, (28) and let the centered measurement observable be 

g : S → Fm, xk = g(sk). (29) The physical map advances time by ∆ t, whereas one position in the serialized vector (14) advances first through the channel index and advances physical time only after the 

mth channel. To represent this distinction rigorously, define the augmented serialized state space 

Sser = S × { 1, . . . , m } (30) and the serialized shift map Fser : Sser → S ser by 

Fser (s, i ) = 

{

(s, i + 1) , 1 ≤ i < m, 

(F∆t(s), 1) , i = m. (31) For ℓ = m(k − 1) + i, set σℓ = ( sk, i ) and introduce the scalar serialized observable 

gser (s, i ) = eT 

> i

g(s), xH,ℓ = gser (σℓ), σℓ+1 = Fser (σℓ), (32) 22 where ei is the ith canonical basis vector of Fm. The q-component delay observable associated with the Hankel lift is therefore 

hq (σ) = [gser (σ) gser (Fser (σ)) · · · gser (F q−1ser (σ)) ]T ∈ Fq . (33) Equations (15) and (33) give hℓ = hq (σℓ). Thus the columns of H are samples of one vector-valued observable along the augmented serialized trajectory. This construction prevents a one-entry channel shift from being incorrectly identified with a physical-time advance of length ∆ t.The classical Koopman construction requires a well-defined evolution map and an observable space invariant under composition [1, 5, 51, 81, 84]. The organization of time-shifted observable data into Hankel matrices constitutes an advancement in data-driven Koopman spectral analysis with delay coordinates. In 2017, Arbabi and Mezić [32] interpreted Hankel columns as finite samples of a Koopman–Krylov sequence and introduced Hankel–DMD algorithm on invariant observable subspaces. In the same year, Susuki, Sako, and Hikihara [85] established spectral equivalence between the Koopman operators of an original system and its reconstruction through delay embedding, while Brunton et al. [33] introduced the HAVOK (Hankel Alternative View of Koopman) analysis of delay-embedded data. In 2019, Das and Giannakis [86] developed spectral results for Koopman operators using delay-coordinate maps. In 2020, Kamb et al. [87] derived operator representations in time-delay coordinates and characterized finite-dimensional delay-observable bases. More recently, Koltai and Kunde [88] formulated Koopman prediction through Krylov spaces of time-delayed observables in 2024, and Colchero et al. [89] extended HAVOK to multichannel time series by means of a block-Hankel construction in 2026. Building on this established theoretical foundation, the present work develops a distinct modeling and forecasting framework for coupled data in the regime m ≪ N :the multichannel snapshots are serialized in a fixed channel–time order and lifted into a single scalar-entry Hankel space. The methodological novelty developed below lies in integrating this construction with a finite-horizon energy decomposition of Koopman operator and the associated selection of data-supported modal triplets, which provide the reduced coordinates for the unified three-phase framework. Accordingly, the following proposition specializes the established operator frame-work to the channel-augmented serialized shift and makes explicit how its action generates the shifted Hankel pair used by the proposed methodology. This explicit connection to the scalar-entry Hankel construction constitutes the application-specific theoretical contribution of the following proposition, whereas general operator exis-tence and generic delay-coordinate compatibility follow from the established theory summarized above.        

> Proposition 1 (Koopman compatibility of the channel-augmented serialized Hankel lift) Let
> Sser be the augmented state space defined in (30) , let
> Fser :Sser −→ S ser

23 be the serialized shift map in (31) , and let Gser be a linear space of F-valued observables containing gser and invariant under composition with Fser :

g ∈ G ser =⇒ g ◦ Fser ∈ G ser . (34) 

Then the Koopman composition operator 

Kser : Gser −→ G ser , (Kser g)( σ) = g(Fser (σ)) , (35) 

is well defined and linear, even when the underlying physical evolution map F∆t is nonlinear. For q ≥ 1, define the serialized Hankel delay-lifting operator on observables by 

Dq g = [g Kser g · · · K q−1ser g]T ∈ (Gser )q , (36) 

and let K(q)ser denote the componentwise Koopman action on vector-valued observables. Then 

K(q)ser Dq g = Dq Kser g, g ∈ G ser . (37) 

In particular, hq = Dq gser , where hq : Sser → Fq is the q-component delay observable. For the shifted Hankel pair defined in (20) , its evaluations along the serialized trajectory satisfy 

hℓ = hq (σℓ),

hℓ+1 = (K(q)ser hq

)(σℓ), ℓ = 1 , . . . , K − 1,

H0 = [hq (σ1) · · · hq (σK−1)] ,

H1 =

[(K(q)ser hq

)(σ1) · · · (K(q)ser hq

)(σK−1)

]

.

(38) 

Thus, hℓ ∈ Fq is the evaluation of the delay observable hq at the ℓth serialized state and constitutes the ℓth column of H.Define the finite delay-observable space 

GHq = span 

{

gser , Kser gser , . . . , Kq−1ser gser 

}

. (39) 

The components of hq are precisely the delay observables spanning GHq . Therefore, if GHq is invariant under Kser , the componentwise Koopman image of hq can be represented as a linear combination of its components. Consequently, there exists a matrix KH ∈ Fq×q such that 

K(q)ser hq = KH hq ,

hℓ+1 = KH hℓ, ℓ = 1 , . . . , K − 1,

H1 = KH H0.

(40) 

The second identity follows by evaluating the first identity at σℓ and using (38) ; stacking these sampled identities for ℓ = 1 , . . . , K − 1 gives the third identity. If the component observables of hq are linearly independent, then KH is unique. If they are linearly dependent, the representing matrix need not be unique; nevertheless, every admissible representation induces the same Koopman action on GHq and the same sampled relation (40) .Proof For every g ∈ G ser , the composition g ◦ Fser is well defined on Sser and belongs to Gser 

by (34). Therefore, (35) defines an operator from Gser into itself, which proves its existence. Furthermore, for g1, g 2 ∈ G ser and α, β ∈ F,

Kser (αg 1 + βg 2) = ( αg 1 + βg 2) ◦ Fser 

= α(g1 ◦ Fser ) + β(g2 ◦ Fser )

24 = αKser g1 + βKser g2, (41) and hence Kser is linear. Because Gser is invariant, all iterates in (36) belong to Gser . Componentwise application gives 

K(q)ser Dq g = [Kser g K2ser g · · · K q

> ser

g]T

= Dq Kser g, 

(42) which proves (37). For g = gser , repeated application of (31) yields F j

> ser

(σℓ) = σℓ+j ; hence (33) gives Dq gser = hq and (38) follows. Finally, invariance of GHq implies that the Koopman image of every component of hq is a linear combination of its q components. Collecting these coefficients rowwise defines KH

and gives the first identity in (40). Evaluation at σ1, . . . , σK−1 gives the second identity. Linear independence makes the coordinate representation unique; under dependence, different coefficient matrices represent the same restricted operator action. □

The suitability of the Koopman framework for the objective stated in Definition 3 follows from its spectral representation. Let φj ∈ G ser be a Koopman eigenfunction satisfying 

Kser φj = λj φj , (43) and suppose that the delay observable belongs, exactly or approximately on the finite serialized trajectory, to the span of the selected eigenfunctions. It then admits the expansion 

hq (σ) = 

> ∞

∑

> j=1

φj (σ)Φj , (44) where Φj ∈ Cq are the associated lifted Koopman modes. Evaluating (44) at σℓ,

ℓ = 1 , . . . , K , gives 

hℓ =

> ∞

∑

> j=1

aj (ℓ)Φj , aj (ℓ) = φj (σℓ). (45) Consequently, retaining r relevant modes gives the finite-horizon lifted factorization 

H ≈̂ Hr = Φr Ar, Φr = [Φ1 · · · Φr

] . (46) Expression (46) has exactly the form required by Definition 3, with 

ψj = Φj , aj (ℓ) = φj (σℓ), j = 1 , . . . , r. (47) Thus, the Koopman modes supply structures in the lifted Hankel row space, and their coefficients quantify activation along serialized-delay positions. The factorization is subsequently returned to the m physical channels by the inverse Hankel construction. The present subsection establishes the mathematical foundation needed here: the serialized shift has a Koopman composition operator, and its spectral representation is compatible with the Hankel-lifted reduced-order model. A distinctive methodological feature developed in this paper is that the selected reduced coordinate subspace is determined by finite-horizon energetic relevance and is not required to be Koopman invariant. Rather than seeking exact linear closure of the 25 retained coordinates, the proposed method constructs orthogonal energy directions of the Koopman energy operator, retains the associated modes, coefficients, and energy eigenvalues as linked modal triplets, and identifies their nonlinear memory-dependent evolution. This separation between energy-based coordinate selection and nonlinear reduced-dynamics identification extends the methodology to finite experimental set-tings in which an accurate low-dimensional Koopman-invariant subspace may not be available. A novel method for numerically identifying a finite-dimensional approximation of the Koopman operator from finite-horizon experimental data is developed in the subsequent section. The purpose of that approximation is to determine the lifted modes 

Φj and the associated coefficients aj (ℓ) required by Definition 3. 

# 3 Computational Aspects 

## 3.1 Overview of the Proposed Data-Driven Twin Framework 

This section introduces a novel unified three-phase methodology for constructing a fully data-driven twin model of finite-horizon coupled experimental data, by means of Koopman mode decomposition theory. 

Phase I introduces the Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition of multichannel data, which constructs an energy-ranked modal representation specifically adapted to closely related or coupled data channels. 

Phase II introduces a novel two-space inverse-calibration technique. A nonlinear dynamical governing model for the vector of temporal coefficients provided by Phase I is constructed and recursively simulated in the Hankel coefficient space associated with the calibration window TH . The resulting coefficient dynamics are mapped through the selected Hankel–Koopman energy modes and anti-diagonal recovery to the physical measurement space on TH , where they define an inverse-calibrated multi-output model of the experimental data. This innovative Hankel-to-physical construction combines reduced dynamical identification with calibration governed by the reconstructed physical channels on the same finite window. 

Phase III formulates a finite-horizon recursive forecasting procedure for a coupled quantity-of-interest. The physical channel trajectories reconstructed in Phase II from the simulated Hankel-space coefficient dynamics are used as exogenous inputs to a separate correlation-based, Pareto-selected model, so the quantity-of-interest is advanced recursively over the prescribed forecast horizon. Thus, the three phases define an integrated decomposition–identification–forecasting pipeline. The phase-specific originality lies in the Hankel–Koopman energy construction of Phase I and the two-space inverse-calibration methodology of Phase II. Phase III uses a recursive forecasting model, while introducing within the unified framework the transfer of Phase II-reconstructed physical channels as its exogenous forecast inputs. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the complete three-phase integration and its explicitly defined finite-horizon interfaces constitute a new methodological contribution. 26 3.2 Phase I: Hankel–Koopman Finite-Horizon Energy Decomposition 

Phase I transforms the coupled experimental observations into a selected set of orthog-onal modal structures whose ordering reflects both their contribution to the measured data and their persistence over a prescribed operator horizon. The construction of the reduced-order model is performed entirely from the available samples. The resulting objects in Phase I are the linked Koopman-energy modal triplets tj = ( μj , ϕj , cT 

> j

), rep-resenting energy-operator eigenvalues, energy modes, and their temporal coefficients as one consistent modal unit. 

3.2.1 Hankel Representation of the Multichannel Data 

This section introduces a novel Hankel–Koopman energy decomposition, in which Hankel lifting is used to enhance numerical robustness when the number of measured channels is smaller than the number of temporal snapshots. A methodological novelty introduced in the present work is the serialized Hankel lifting of multichannel finite-horizon data. Let X ∈ Fm×N , xH ∈ FNH , and H ∈ Hq,K be the centered measurement matrix, serialized record, and Hankel lift defined in (13)–(18). Phase I imposes the delay depth as q ≈ ⌊ N/ 2⌋; hence q is both the delay depth and the exact number of Hankel rows. The fixed columnwise channel–time ordering enables the lift to encode within-channel evolution and cross-channel dependence in one representation, so the decomposition identifies coherent structures of the complete multichannel record. Channelwise normalization or scaling may be applied to X before serialization and then inverted after recovery and reshaping to the original m × N channel arrangement. Phase I uses the serialized shifted Hankel pair ( H0, H1) defined in (20). 

3.2.2 Finite-Dimensional Approximation of the Koopman Operator 

Proposition 1 establishes that the shifted Hankel pair H0 and H1 are paired samples of the Koopman action, with the augmented serialized state σ and delay observable 

hq defined in (32). The finite-dimensional approximation is now obtained directly from these two matrices by projecting the sampled relation onto the data-supported subspace. Let 

p = rank( H0) ≤ min {q, K − 1} (48) denote the rank determined from the economy-size singular value decomposition of the input matrix. In the full-rank case, p = min {q, K − 1}. Restricting the economy-size factors to the positive singular spectrum gives 

H0 = UpΣpV H 

> p

, U H 

> p

Up = Ip, V H 

> p

Vp = Ip, (49) where Σp contains the positive singular values. The following lemma gives the reduced least-squares result required in the proof of the finite-dimensional approximation. 27 Lemma 1 (Unique reduced least-squares solution) Let C ∈ Fp×n, V ∈ Fn×p with V HV = Ip,and let Σ ∈ Rp×p be diagonal with strictly positive diagonal entries. Then the problem 

minimize 

˜K∈Fp×p

∥∥∥C − ˜KΣV H∥∥∥2

> F

(50) 

has the unique solution 

˜K = CV Σ−1. (51) 

Proof The normal equation associated with (50) is 

( ˜KΣV H − C)V Σ = 0.

Since V HV = Ip, this equation reduces to 

˜KΣ2 = CV Σ.

The matrix Σ is invertible; hence (51) follows. Moreover, Σ2 is positive definite, so the quadratic objective in (50) is strictly convex with respect to ˜K. Therefore, the stationary point is the unique global minimizer. □

Proposition 2 (Finite-dimensional approximation of the Koopman operator) Let H0, H1 ∈

Fq×(K−1) be the serialized-shift Hankel matrices defined by (20) , and let H0 = UpΣpV H 

> p

be the rank-p economy-size SVD in (49) , with p ≥ 1. The finite-dimensional approximation of the Koopman operator on the data-supported subspace range( Up) is defined as the solution of the finite-data least-squares problem 

˜Kp = arg min 

˜K∈Fp×p

∥∥∥H1 − Up ˜KU H 

> p

H0

∥∥∥2

> F

. (52) 

This problem has a unique solution, explicitly given by 

˜Kp = U H 

> p

H1VpΣ−1 

> p

∈ Fp×p. (53) 

Proof Let Pp = UpU H 

> p

be the orthogonal projector onto range( Up). For every ˜K ∈ Fp×p,

H1 − Up ˜KU H 

> p

H0 = ( I − Pp)H1

+ Up

(

U H 

> p

H1 − ˜KU H 

> p

H0

)

.

The two terms on the right-hand side are orthogonal in the Frobenius inner product. Therefore, 

∥∥∥H1 − Up ˜KU H 

> p

H0

∥∥∥2

> F

= ∥(I − Pp)H1∥2

> F

+

∥∥∥U H 

> p

H1 − ˜KU H 

> p

H0

∥∥∥2

> F

,

where the first term is independent of ˜K. Moreover, premultiplication of (49) by U H 

> p

yields 

U H 

> p

H0 = ΣpV H 

> p

.

Consequently, minimizing (52) is equivalent to solving minimize 

˜K∈Fp×p

∥∥∥U H 

> p

H1 − ˜KΣpV H

> p

∥∥∥2

> F

.

28 Apply Lemma 1 with C = U H       

> pH1,V=Vp, and Σ=Σp. The unique minimizer is

˜Kp = U H   

> pH1VpΣ−1
> p,
> which proves (53). □

The exact and finite-data matrices are now related explicitly. Under the invariance assumption of Proposition 1, relation (40) gives H1 = KH H0. Substitution of this identity and the SVD (49) into (53) yields 

˜Kp = U H 

> p

KH Up ∈ Fp×p. (54) Thus, whenever the exact invariant representation exists, ˜Kp is its orthogonal projection in the Hankel row coordinates onto the data-supported subspace range( Up). For general finite experimental data, the same notation denotes the unique projected least-squares approximation defined by (52). This formulation makes explicit the roles of the delay-observable space, the sampled Koopman relation, and the orthogonal projection onto the data-supported finite-rank subspace. It is consistent with established Hankel–DMD theory [32, 33, 85–89], while its role in the present framework is to connect that theory explicitly to the channel-augmented scalar-entry serialization of the multichannel experimental data. Proposition 2 therefore identifies ˜Kp as the unique least-squares representation of the sampled Koopman action on the data-supported subspace. For general experimental data, ˜Kp may be non-normal. Consequently, its eigenvectors need not be orthogonal and their individual contributions need not possess an additive energy interpretation. The goal of the present approach is to obtain a stable orthogonal decomposition while retaining the action of the identified Koopman approximation. Define the self-adjoint positive-semidefinite operator 

Gp = ˜KH 

> p

˜Kp, GH 

> p

= Gp, zHGpz = ∥˜Kpz∥22 ≥ 0. (55) By the spectral theory [90], there exist μj ≥ 0 and an orthonormal eigenvector matrix 

Q = [ q1, . . . , qp] such that 

GpQ = QΛG, ΛG = diag( μ1, . . . , μ p),μ1 ≥ μ2 ≥ · · · ≥ μp ≥ 0, QHQ = Ip. (56) The values μj are the squared singular values of ˜Kp and measure its one-step energetic action along the directions qj . In this original approach, Phase I orders the spectrum of the self-adjoint Koopman energy operator Gp rather than directly ordering the generally complex eigenvalues of ˜Kp.The energy spectrum is then linked intrinsically to the Koopman spectrum because 

Gp is constructed from the same finite-dimensional Koopman approximation. More precisely, if ˜Kpv = ˜λv and ˜Kp is normal, then 

Gpv = ˜KH 

> p

˜Kpv = |˜λ|2v. (57) 29 Remark 2 In the normal case, the Koopman and energy directions can be chosen identically and their eigenvalues satisfy μj = |˜λj |2. For a non-normal ˜Kp, the μj remain the squared singular values of the Koopman approximation and the qj are its right singular directions. 

Definition 4 (Hankel–Koopman energy modes and coefficient matrix) Let ˜Kp ∈ Cp×p be the reduced finite-dimensional approximation of the Koopman operator, and let Q ∈ Cp×p

contain an orthonormal set of eigenvectors of the positive semidefinite operator Gp = ˜KH 

> p

˜Kp.The Hankel–Koopman energy modes and their associated finite-horizon coefficient matrix are defined by 

Φ = UpQ = [ϕ1 · · · ϕp

] ∈ Fq×p, C = ΦHH =

cT

> 1

...

cT

> p

 ∈ Fp×K . (58) For every j = 1 , . . . , p , the associated Koopman-energy modal triplet is 

tj =

(

μj , ϕj , cT

> j

)

. (59) 

Remark 3 For each j = 1 , . . . , p , the row cT 

> j

represents the complete finite-horizon evolution of the coefficient associated with the mode ϕj . Equivalently, every column of C is the reduced-coordinate vector of the corresponding Hankel snapshot and therefore plays the same role as aℓ in (21). The column index is the serialized-delay position ℓ, rather than the physical sample index k. Because the channel–time serialization is fixed and invertible, these ordered coefficient rows encode the progression of the complete multichannel record and are termed temporal coefficient series below. The three entries of tj are inseparable: the eigenvector qj associated with μj generates 

ϕj , and projection onto ϕj generates cT 

> j

. Any sorting or selection must therefore permute and retain the energy eigenvalue, energy mode, and coefficient row together. These modes are induced by the identified Koopman approximation through Gp. They coincide with orthogonal Koopman eigendirections in the normal case described by (57); in the general non-normal case, they are the corresponding orthogonal Koopman-energy directions. 

A central innovation of the proposed decomposition is the construction of orthogonal modes, unlike classical DMD modes, which are generally nonorthogonal. Orthogonality allows the contribution and energy of each mode to be clearly identified and supports numerically stable coefficient recovery. 

Proposition 3 (Orthogonality of the Hankel–Koopman energy modes) The modes defined by (58) are orthonormal with respect to the Hankel-space inner product and satisfy 

⟨x, y⟩ := xHy, ΦHΦ = Ip. (60) 

Consequently, C is the unique coefficient matrix of the orthogonal projection of H onto 

Range( Φ), and ̂

Hp = ΦC = ΦΦ HH. (61) 

30 Proof Using (58), the orthogonality of Up in (49), and the orthogonality of Q in (56), one obtains 

ΦHΦ = QHU H 

> p

UpQ = QHQ = Ip. (62) The coefficient and projection formulas then follow from the standard orthogonal projection theorem in the delay space. □

3.2.3 Finite-Horizon Modal Energy Criterion 

This subsection introduces a novel finite-horizon modal energy criterion for identifying and selecting the dominant Hankel–Koopman energy modes and their associated temporal coefficients for the construction of the reduced-order model. Instantaneous coefficient magnitude alone does not distinguish a large but rapidly attenuated component from a moderately excited component that persists under the identified evolution. The proposed criterion combines these two effects. Let L ∈ N0

denote the operator horizon , namely the number of energy-operator applications over which persistence is accumulated. This integer is conceptually distinct from both the duration Tfin of the finite modeling horizon and an energy-retention percentage. 

Definition 5 (Finite-horizon persistence factor) Let μj ≥ 0 be the eigenvalue of the Koopman energy operator Gp associated with the energy direction qj , and let L ∈ N0 be a prescribed operator horizon. The finite-horizon persistence factor of the jth energy direction is defined by 

P (L) 

> j

=

> L

∑

> ℓ=0

μℓj =



1 − μL+1 

> j

1 − μj

, μj̸ = 1 ,L + 1 , μj = 1 .

(63) It quantifies the accumulated energetic action of that direction over the L + 1 operator levels 

ℓ = 0 , . . . , L .

Definition 6 (Finite-horizon modal energy) Let cT 

> j

be the temporal coefficient row associated with the jth orthogonal Hankel–Koopman energy mode. The coefficient energy of this mode over the recorded experiment is 

αj = ∥cT 

> j

∥22, (64) and its finite-horizon modal energy over operator horizon L is defined as 

E(L) 

> j

= αj P (L) 

> j

= ∥cT 

> j

∥22

> L

∑

> ℓ=0

μℓj . (65) Thus, αj measures the contribution of the mode to the recorded experiment, whereas P (L)

> j

measures its persistence under the reduced Koopman energy operator. 

Theorem 1 (Finite-horizon Hankel–Koopman energy decomposition) Let Gp, Q, ΛG, and 

C be defined by (55) –(58) . Then the accumulated quadratic energy 

JL(C) = 

> L

∑

> ℓ=0

trace 

(

CHΛℓGC

)

(66) 

31 admits the additive modal decomposition 

JL(C) = 

> p

∑

> j=1

E(L) 

> j

. (67) 

Therefore, sorting the modes by decreasing E(L) 

> j

orders the orthogonal delay-coordinate structures jointly by measured-data relevance and finite-horizon energetic persistence. Proof Since ΛG is diagonal, for every ℓ ∈ { 0, . . . , L },trace 

(

CHΛℓGC

)

=

> p

∑

> j=1

μℓj ∥cT 

> j

∥22. (68) Summing (68) over ℓ = 0 , . . . , L and interchanging the two finite sums yields (67). □

Remark 4 (Importance of eigenvalues near unity) The energy interpretation is particularly transparent for eigenvalues near unity. If 0 ≤ μj ≤ 1, then P (L) 

> j

≤ L + 1, with equality if and only if μj = 1. Hence a unit eigenvalue identifies a direction whose norm is preserved by 

˜Kp, and its accumulated energy increases linearly with the horizon. Values μj ≈ 1 describe nearly persistent directions and are increasingly favored as L grows. If μj < 1, the persistence factor remains bounded as L → ∞ , whereas μj > 1 indicates an amplifying direction. Such a direction is not discarded automatically; its relevance is assessed over the prescribed finite horizon, which is the appropriate setting for experimental records of finite duration. Multiple eigenvalues equal or close to one may represent several mutually orthogonal delay structures whose energy is preserved over the observed dynamics. 

3.2.4 Koopman-Energy Triplet Selection and Reduced Reconstruction 

Let π be a permutation such that 

E(L) 

> π1

≥ E(L) 

> π2

≥ · · · ≥ E(L) 

> πp

. (69) For a candidate dimension r ∈ { 1, . . . , p }, define 

ΛG,r = diag ( μπ1 , . . . , μ πr ) , Φr = [ϕπ1 · · · ϕπr

] , Cr =



cT

> π1

...

cT

> πr

 ,̂ Hr = Φr Cr .

(70) Equivalently, the rank-r candidate is the ordered collection of the first r modal triplets, 

Tr = ( ΛG,r , Φr, Cr) = ( tπ1 , . . . , tπr ) . (71) Thus, r is the cardinality of a complete Koopman-energy candidate. The cumulative energy fraction 

ρ(L) 

> r

=

∑rℓ=1 E(L)

> πℓ

∑pj=1 E(L)

> j

(72) 32 quantifies the proportion of finite-horizon energy captured by the first r modes in the prescribed ordering. A principal role of Phase I is to determine the smallest number of Koopman-energy modes consistent with the required reconstruction quality. When several μj lie close to unity, the corresponding modes remain persistent over the finite horizon, and a high energy-retention level may be associated with a large modal set. Phase I therefore integrates the finite-horizon energy ordering with a Pareto-based selection that jointly evaluates reconstruction quality and reduced dimension to identify the retained candidate. For matrices of compatible size, introduce the Frobenius inner product 

⟨A, B⟩F = trace (AHB) . (73) Its induced norm is ∥A∥F = ⟨A, A⟩1/2 

> F

. The reconstruction error and matrix cosine similarity of candidate r are, respectively 

εr = ∥H −̂ Hr∥F

∥H∥F

, (74) 

γr = Re ⟨H,̂ Hr⟩F

∥H∥F ∥̂Hr∥F

. (75) Let 

R = {1, . . . , p } (76) denote the finite set of candidate reduced dimensions, and let χr = r/p be the corresponding dimension ratio. For a weak dimensionality penalty βdim ≥ 0, define the vector-valued objective 

F (r) = 

[F1(r)

F2(r)

]

=

[ εr + βdim χr

1 − γr + βdim χr

]

. (77) Thus, selection of the reduced Koopman-energy candidate Tr is first posed as the discrete bi-objective optimization problem minimize  

> r∈R

F (r) = minimize 

> r∈R

[F1(r)

F2(r)

]

. (78) The first objective favors accurate Hankel reconstruction, whereas the second favors structural alignment with the experimental Hankel matrix. The common term βdim χr

weakly favors lower-dimensional representations.                          

> Definition 7 (Pareto-optimal reduced Koopman-energy candidate) For ra, r b∈ R , the candidate Trais said to Pareto-dominate Trb, written ra≺rb, if
> Fi(ra)≤Fi(rb)for every i∈ { 1,2},Fi0(ra)< F i0(rb)for at least one i0∈ { 1,2}.
> (79)

33 A candidate Tr◦ , indexed by r◦ ∈ R , is Pareto-optimal if no candidate Ts with s ∈ R Pareto-dominates it. Consequently, the index set of all Pareto-optimal Koopman-energy candidates is 

P = {r ∈ R | ∄ s ∈ R such that s ≺ r} . (80) 

Problem (78) generally produces a set of non-dominated Koopman-energy candi-dates rather than a unique modal representation. A second, explicitly stated decision rule is therefore used to determine the selected candidate Tr⋆ ; the integer r⋆ denotes its retained dimension. We specify an admissible interval rmin ≤ r ≤ rmax and a preferred dimension rtar 

within this interval, and define the admissible set 

Radm = {r ∈ R | rmin ≤ r ≤ rmax } , (81) and the final candidate set 

C =

{P ∩ R adm , P ∩ R adm ̸ = ∅,

Radm , P ∩ R adm = ∅. (82) For r ∈ C , let ̂

εr = εr

max s∈C εs + ϵmach 

,̂ δr = 1 − γr

max s∈C (1 − γs) + ϵmach 

,̂

χr =



|r − rtar |

rtar 

, if rmin ≤ rtar ≤ rmax 

0, otherwise ,

(83) where ϵmach prevents division by zero. Thus, rtar ∈ { rmin , . . . , r max } denotes the preferred number of Hankel–Koopman energy modes. It may be chosen according to the desired degree of spectral truncation, the available computational budget, or prior knowledge of the effective dimension of the experimental dynamics. The quantity ̂ χr measures the relative deviation from this target: it vanishes at r = rtar and increases symmetrically away from the preferred dimension. The target acts only as a soft preference; consequently, r⋆ may differ from 

rtar whenever the gain in reconstruction accuracy or matrix similarity justifies the deviation. With αdim ∈ [0 , 1], define the scalar decision problem 

J(r) = 1 − αdim 

2

(̂ εr +̂ δr

) + αdim ̂ χr, r⋆ = min 

(

arg min 

> r∈C

J(r)

)

. (84) The outer minimum makes the tie-breaking rule mathematically explicit: among all minimizers of J, the candidate with the smallest cardinality is selected. This rule avoids choosing an arbitrary point on a nearly flat Pareto front. 34 The output of the modal stage is the selected Koopman-energy candidate 

Tr⋆ = ( ΛG,r ⋆ , Φr⋆ , Cr⋆ ) ,̂ Hr⋆ = Φr⋆ Cr⋆ , ΦH 

> r⋆

Φr⋆ = Ir⋆ . (85) The rows of Cr⋆ are the reduced coefficient time series passed to Phase II, whereas each column is the reduced coordinate vector at one serialized-delay position. Since they are obtained from the Hankel matrix of the complete serialized record, these coordinates carry information from the interleaved measured channels and their local delay history. 

3.2.5 Anti-Diagonal Recovery of the Experimental Channels 

Modal truncation generally yields a matrix ̂ Hr⋆ that aim to approximate the exact Hankel structure. Consequently, the scalar positions representing a common entry of the serialized record may contain distinct approximations. A unique serialized record is obtained by averaging these estimates along the corresponding scalar anti-diagonals. For each serialized index ℓ ∈ { 1, . . . , N H }, we define 

Jℓ = {(i, k ) : 1 ≤ i ≤ q, 1 ≤ k ≤ K, i + k − 1 = ℓ} . (86) 

Definition 8 (Uniform anti-diagonal averaging) Let ̂ Hr⋆ = [̂ Hi,k 

] ∈ Fq×K be the reduced Hankel reconstruction, and let Jℓ be the scalar anti-diagonal index set in (86). The anti-diagonal multiplicity of serialized entry ℓ is 

νℓ = |J ℓ| = min {ℓ, q, K, N H − ℓ + 1 }. (87) The uniform anti-diagonal average of ̂ Hr⋆ is the centered serialized sequence {̂x H,ℓ }NH

> ℓ=1

defined by ̂

x H,ℓ = 1

νℓ

∑

> (i,k )∈J ℓ

̂

Hi,k , ℓ = 1 , . . . , N H . (88) Thus, all reconstructed occurrences of the same serialized record contribute equally. 

Consequently, uniform anti-diagonal averaging is the least-squares projection of the reduced matrix onto the set of Hankel-consistent serialized sequences. Let ̂ xH = [ ̂ xH, 1, . . . , ̂ xH,N H ]T. The inverse of the serialization in (14) gives ̂

X = reshape( ̂xH , m, N ),̂ Y = ¯ y1T 

> N

+̂ X = [̂ y1 · · · ̂ yN

] . (89) Thus, the anti-diagonal projection reconstructs a vector of length NH = mN , after which inverse reshaping restores the original channel ordering and the reference state. 

3.2.6 Algorithmic Formulation and Computational Complexity 

Algorithm 1 presents the Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition (HKFED) introduced in this paper. Let 

s = min {q, K − 1}, p = rank( H0) ≤ s. (90) 35 Algorithm 1 Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition (HKFED) 

Require: Centered or raw measurements Y on Tfin ; mean vector ¯ y; imposed Hankel delay depth q; operator horizon L; Pareto and dimension-selection parameters. 

Ensure: Selected modes Φr⋆ , reduced coefficients Cr⋆ , associated energy eigenvalues 

ΛG,r ⋆ , reconstructed Hankel matrix ̂ Hr⋆ , and recovered channel matrix ̂ Y . 

> 1:

Center the measurements according to (13).  

> 2:

Serialize the centered matrix as xH = vec( X), set NH = mN , and set K =

NH − q + 1 according to (14).  

> 3:

Construct H, H0, and H1 from (16) and (20).  

> 4:

Compute the economy-size SVD of H0, determine p = rank( H0), and retain its positive singular triplets H0 = UpΣpV H 

> p

. 

> 5:

Form ˜Kp from (53).  

> 6:

Form Gp = ˜KH 

> p

˜Kp and compute GpQ = QΛG. 

> 7:

Compute Φ and C from (58).  

> 8:

for j = 1 , . . . , p do  

> 9:

Compute P (L) 

> j

, αj , and E(L) 

> j

from (63)–(65).  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

Form the modal triplets tj = ( μj , ϕj , cT 

> j

) and sort the complete triplets by decreasing E(L) 

> j

. 

> 12:

for r = 1 , . . . , p do  

> 13:

Update ̂ Hr by adding the rth ranked modal outer product.  

> 14:

Evaluate εr, γr , F1(r), and F2(r).  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

Extract P from (80), form C from (82), and select the complete candidate Tr⋆ ,with its cardinality r⋆ determined by (84).  

> 17:

Set ̂ Hr⋆ = Φr⋆ Cr⋆ . 

> 18:

Recover ̂ xH by uniform scalar anti-diagonal averaging (88), reshape it to ̂ X ∈

Fm×N , and restore the reference state using (89).  

> 19:

return Φ r⋆ , Cr⋆ , ΛG,r ⋆ , {E(L) 

> j

}pj=1 , r⋆,̂ Hr⋆ , and ̂ Y .Forming the Hankel representation requires O(qK ) operations and storage. For a dense matrix H0 ∈ Fq×(K−1) , its deterministic economy-size SVD requires 

O(q(K − 1) s) = O(q(K − 1) min {q, K − 1}) (91) operations. This cost depends only on the dimensions of the measured Hankel pair. After p has been determined, forming (53) costs 

O(q(K − 1) p + p2 min {q, K − 1}) , (92) where the smaller cost is obtained by choosing the more favorable order of the two matrix products. Forming the p × p Gram operator and diagonalizing it each require O(p3) operations. Computing the modes and coefficients, and incrementally 36 constructing all candidate reconstructions, requires O(qp 2 +pqK ) operations. The finite-horizon energies and their ordering require O(pL + p log p) operations, whereas direct pairwise Pareto comparison and score evaluation require at most O(p2). Anti-diagonal recovery is linear in the number of Hankel entries, namely O(qK ). The peak storage required by the Hankel data and the economy-size SVD is 

O(qK + ( q + K − 1) s + s2) . (93) Most importantly, neither the full q × q least-squares Koopman matrix H1H†

> 0

nor its q × q Gram operator is formed. Algorithm 1 therefore uses the complete data-supported subspace identified by the economy-size SVD; spectral truncation is introduced only after the finite-horizon energies have been evaluated, through the selected candidate Tr⋆ of cardinality r⋆.

## 3.3 Phase II: Inverse-Calibrated Multi-Output NLARX Model 

Nonlinear autoregressive models with exogenous inputs provide flexible data-driven rep-resentations in which the current output is expressed as a nonlinear function of delayed outputs and present or delayed external inputs. Such models have been employed for interpretable system identification, nonlinear dynamical modelling, condition monitoring [91–93]. Phase II of the proposed data-driven twin framework identifies the reduced evolution map Mr for the modal coefficients, introduced in (24). Its state is the selected Hankel-space coefficient vector produced by Phase I, and its output is a coupled, multi-output nonlinear autoregressive model, obtained by deep learning. The recursively simulated modal coefficients are multiplied by the selected modes, returned to the experimental channels by uniform anti-diagonal averaging, and the reduced order twin model is compared with the measurements on a prescribed finite calibration window. This post-reconstruction assessment in the original measurement variables is the defining meaning of inverse calibration in the present work. Let 

Tstart = tns , TH = {tk : k = ns, . . . , n s + H}, TFH = H∆t, (94) where H ∈ N0 is the prescribed number of calibration intervals and ns is the global index of its first sampling instant. The associated global sampling-index set is 

IH = {ns, n s + 1 , . . . , n s + H}, NI = H + 1 , NH, I = mN I ,KI = NH, I − q + 1 , ℓs = m(ns − 1) + 1 . (95) In the terminology of Definition 1, TH is a finite Phase II calibration window, required to satisfy 

TH ⊆ T fin , ns = NQ + 1 , ns + H ≤ N. (96) Thus, in the coupled framework, the calibration window begins at the first sampling instant after observation window Tobs . The window is called admissible when NH, I ≥

q + 1, equivalently KI ≥ 2. Throughout Phase II, the subscript I denotes restriction to 37 the index set IH . The corresponding measurement matrix, locally serialized centered vector, Hankel matrix, and selected coefficient matrix are 

YI = [yns · · · yns+H

] ∈ Fm×NI ,

xH, I = vec (YI − ¯y1T

> NI

) ∈ FNH, I ,

HI = [hℓs · · · hℓs+KI −1

] ∈ Fq×KI ,

CI = Cr⋆ (: , ℓ s : ℓs + KI − 1) = [cI,1 · · · cI,K I

] ∈ Fr⋆×KI .

(97) Here the local coefficient index k = 1 , . . . , K I corresponds to the global serialized Hankel-column index ℓs+k−1. Thus, the NI physical samples on TH yield NH, I = mN I

serialized entries and KI local delay-coordinate states. The local one-step shift is performed directly along the columns of the serialized-data Hankel representation. The following notation distinguish the sampled-time set from the spaces associated with it. We define 

CI = Fr⋆×KI , HI = Fq×KI , YI = Fm×NI , (98) reppresenting the Hankel coefficient space in which the coefficient dynamics are identified and simulated, the local Hankel-matrix space, and the physical measurement space on TH , respectively. The complete Phase II direction is therefore 

CI

> Φr⋆

−−−→ HI

> AI

−−−→ YI , (99) and both selection procedures assess their candidates at the final, physical-space end of this map. 

3.3.1 NLARX Dynamics in the Hankel Coefficient Space 

The rows of CI are temporal coefficient series, whereas its columns are the coupled reduced states to be advanced by the model in CI . For α = ( na, n b, n k), define the required history length 

ℓα = max {na, n k + nb − 1}. (100) The na block describes autoregressive memory, while the delayed ( nb, n k) block describes inter-coefficient coupling. Relative to each scalar coefficient equation, the remaining coefficient components are exogenous regressors, hence the stacked vector model is a coupled multi-output Nonlinear AutoRegressive with Exogenous inputs (NLARX) model. 

Definition 9 (Coupled multi-output NLARX realization of Mr⋆ ) Let ϕα : Fdα → Fpα be a fixed continuous nonlinear feature map. For k ≥ ℓα, define 

γα,k = ϕα

(cI,k , . . . , cI,k −na+1 ;

cI,k −nk +1 , . . . , cI,k −nk −nb+2 

). (101) 

38 A feature-linear coupled NLARX model with parameter matrix Bα ∈ Fr⋆×pα is 

cI,k +1 = Bαγα,k + ηk, k = ℓα, . . . , K I − 1. (102) The mapping 

Mr⋆

(cI,k , . . . ; Bα

) = Bαγα,k (103) is the NLARX realization of the selected reduced evolution map Mr⋆ in (24). 

Remark 5 Representation (103) is linear in Bα, but nonlinear in the delayed coefficient vector. Typical components of ϕα include a constant, delayed coefficients, componentwise powers, hyperbolic tangent features, cross-products, and squared Euclidean norms. This separation is important: it permits a strictly convex Tikhonov identification in the Hankel coefficient space for every fixed structure while retaining nonlinear coupled coefficient dynamics. Inverse calibration enters subsequently, when the freely simulated candidate is reconstructed and scored in YI .

Given the initial history cI,1, . . . , cI,ℓ α , let 

˜CI (Bα) = SI,α(Bα) = [˜cI,1 · · · ˜cI,K I

] (104) denote the free-run coefficient sequence obtained by fixing the initial history to its observed Phase I values and applying (102) recursively thereafter. The recursion is identified and simulated in CI , whose columns correspond to the serialized Hankel representation associated with calibration window TH ⊆ T fin .

3.3.2 Inverse Reconstruction and Physical-Space Calibration 

After coefficient-space identification and free-run simulation, each candidate is mapped back to the data channels through the same modes and recovery rule used in Phase I: 

˜HI (Bα) = Φr⋆ ˜CI (Bα) ∈ Fq×KI . (105) Let AI denote uniform scalar anti-diagonal averaging on the local Hankel matrix, followed by reshaping the recovered vector of length NH, I into an m × NI centered channel matrix, as in (88) and (89). The complete finite-horizon reconstruction operator is RI,α(Bα) = ¯ y1T 

> NI

+ AI (Φr⋆ SI,α(Bα)) =̂ YI (Bα) ∈ Fm×NI . (106) Accordingly, SI,α acts in CI , multiplication by Φr⋆ maps the simulated coefficient trajectory to HI , and AI maps the resulting Hankel matrix to YI . The comparison with YI is made only after all three operations have been completed. 

Definition 10 (Physical-space inverse-calibration score on a finite calibration window) Let 

Kα ⊂ Fr⋆×pα be a nonempty admissible parameter set and let λreg > 0. Define 

JI,λ reg (B) = 

∥∥YI − RI,α(B)∥∥2

> F

∥∥YI − ¯y1T

> NI

∥∥2 

> F

+ ϵmach 

+ λreg ∥B∥2F. (107) 

39 For any coefficient-space candidate B, the data-misfit term in (107) is therefore a physical-space quantity: it compares two elements of YI after modal reconstruction and anti-diagonal recovery. Consequently, JI,λ reg is called the physical-space inverse-calibration score . Its associated continuous parameter-level refinement problem is         

> B⋆
> I,α∈arg min
> B∈Kα
> JI,λ reg (B)(108) and any minimizer is called a regularized parameter-level inverse-calibrated refinement on the finite calibration window THin (94).

Definition 10 provides both an auxiliary continuous parameter-level inverse problem and the physical-space scoring map used by the two implemented recovery procedures. In those procedures, for every fixed structure, Bλ, α is first obtained from the coefficient-space Tikhonov problem (119), and JI,λ reg is subsequently evaluated at that candidate after complete physical reconstruction. Hence physical measurements govern candidate selection without becoming states of the NLARX recursion. The implemented inverse-calibrated model is the candidate selected by one of the finite Tikhonov or Pareto rules defined below. Thus, inverse calibration does not place the NLARX recursion in physical space. It evaluates a coefficient-space dynamical candidate through the physical reconstruction produced by the inverse map (99). The finite calibration window is the finite sampled-time set on which the coefficient trajectory, its modal reconstruction, and the physical-channel error are linked. Across experiments, changing ns together with the terminal observation index NQ = ns − 1 translates TH within Tfin while preserving the temporal relations in (7); each such window produces a locally calibrated model governed by the same theory. 

3.3.3 Existence, Uniqueness, and Finite-Horizon Stability of the Inverse-Calibrated NLARX Model 

Before introducing the Phase II algorithms, we first determine whether the inverse-calibration problem admits a solution and under which additional conditions that solution is uniquely identifiable and stable with respect to perturbations of the cali-bration data. This analysis is essential because the free-run reconstruction operator in (106) is generally nonlinear in B; consequently, the functional (107) need not be glob-ally strictly convex and need not possess a unique global minimizer without additional assumptions. This section presents a theoretical foundation for existence, uniqueness and inverse stability of a NLARX model in Hankel coefficient space with respect to finite-horizon calibration window. The existence of a regularized solution on every admissible finite calibration window is proved by means of continuity and coercivity. Uniqueness and inverse stability for a fixed NLARX structure is established under finite-window smoothness and curvature-controlled regularization. To the authors’ knowledge, this explicit separation of regularized existence from curvature-controlled uniqueness and inverse stability constitutes a novel and original theoretical discussion for an inverse-calibration score whose NLARX recursion remains in Hankel coefficient space while 40 its recursively simulated coefficients are reconstructed and assessed in the original measurement space. 

Assumption 1 (Finite-window admissibility and continuity) The parameter set Kα is nonempty and closed, the feature map ϕα is continuous, and, for every B ∈ Kα, the recursive simulation remains finite at all local coefficient indices k = 1 , . . . , K I associated with TH .

Proposition 4 (Continuity and coercivity) Under Assumption 1, SI,α : Kα → CI and 

RI,α : Kα → YI are continuous. Moreover, for λreg > 0, JI,λ reg is continuous and coercive: 

∥B∥F → ∞ =⇒ JI,λ reg (B) → ∞ . (109) 

Proof The prescribed initial coefficient history is independent of B. At the first simulated step, (102) is a composition of continuous maps of B. If the simulated coefficients are continuous through step k, continuity of ϕα and matrix multiplication implies continuity at step k + 1. Induction over the finite number KI − ℓα of recursive steps proves continuity of SI,α as a map into CI . Multiplication by Φr⋆ maps this trajectory into HI ; uniform anti-diagonal averaging and restoration of ¯ y are affine continuous operations from HI into YI . Hence RI,α

is continuous. The functional in (107) is therefore continuous. Finally, 

JI,λ reg (B) ≥ λreg ∥B∥2F,

which proves (109). □

Remark 6 Continuity ensures that small perturbations of the NLARX parameter matrix B

produce small perturbations first in the recursively simulated Hankel-space coefficients, then in the reconstructed experimental data, and, consequently, in the physical-space objective-function value. This property follows from the continuity of every stage of the proposed finite-horizon reconstruction procedure. In particular, continuity of the recursive simulation follows inductively at each time step from the continuity of the NLARX feature map and the prescribed initial coefficient history. Since the calibration window contains finitely many time steps, the complete simulated trajectory depends continuously on B. Coercivity ensures that the objective-function value becomes arbitrarily large as the norm of the parameter matrix increases without bound. Thus, the regularization term penalizes unbounded growth of the NLARX coefficients and guarantees that any minimizing sequence of parameters remains bounded. Together, continuity and coercivity provide the essential properties required to establish the existence of a minimizer on the finite calibration window. 

Assumption 2 (Finite-window smoothness and curvature control) Let Kα be nonempty, compact, and convex, and keep the selected modes, prescribed initial coefficient history, and reference vector fixed. Assume that RI,α is twice continuously differentiable with respect to 

B on a neighborhood of Kα. For a calibration matrix Y near the measured matrix YI , the existing reconstruction-error term in (107) is written as 

JI,0(B; Y ) = 

∥∥Y − RI,α(B)∥∥2

> F

∥∥Y − ¯y1T

> NI

∥∥2 

> F

+ ϵmach 

. (110) 

41 Here, 1NI ∈ RNI denotes the vector of ones, and ¯y1T 

> NI

= [ ¯y ¯y · · · ¯y] ∈ Fm×NI (111) is the matrix obtained by repeating the reference state ¯ y at every calibration sample. The subscript 0 indicates that the regularization term is omitted. The already introduced ϵmach > 0is the machine-precision safeguard that prevents division by zero. Assume that there exist finite constants ρI ≥ 0 and LI ≥ 0 such that, for every B ∈ Kα,parameter increment ∆, and calibration matrices Y , Y1, and Y2 in a bounded neighborhood of YI ,

D2 

> B

JI,0(B; Y )[ ∆, ∆] ≥ − 2ρI ∥∆∥2F,

∥∥∇B JI,0(B; Y1) − ∇ B JI,0(B; Y2)∥∥F ≤ 2LI ∥Y1 − Y2∥F . (112) Here, D2 

> B

and ∇B denote the second directional derivative and the gradient with respect to the NLARX parameter matrix. The constant ρI bounds the possible negative curvature of the reconstruction-error term, and LI bounds the change of its parameter gradient under perturbations of the calibration data. The regularization parameter already used in (107) satisfies 

λreg > ρ I . (113) 

Assumption 2 involves the same measurement-space objective and regularization parameter already used to define the inverse-calibration score. Its two additional quantities are analytical bounds on finite-window curvature and data sensitivity. 

Theorem 2 (Existence, uniqueness and inverse stability of physical-space inverse calibration solution on an admissible finite window) Under Assumption 1, for every λreg > 0 and every admissible finite calibration window TH ⊆ T fin , problem (108) possesses at least one solution. Under Assumptions 1 and 2, the regularized inverse-calibration functional in (107) admits exactly one minimizer B⋆(Y ) on Kα for every admissible perturbation Y of the calibration matrix. For any two such matrices Y (1)  

> I

and Y (2)  

> I

, the corresponding minimizers satisfy 

∥∥∥B⋆(Y (1)  

> I

) − B⋆(Y (2)  

> I

)

∥∥∥F

≤ LI

λreg − ρI

∥∥∥Y (1)  

> I

− Y (2) 

> I

∥∥∥F

. (114) 

Consequently, the regularized reconstruction model is uniquely defined and Lipschitz stable with respect to noisy finite-window calibration data. Proof Let j⋆ be the infimum of JI,λ reg on Kα and choose a minimizing sequence {Bν }ν≥1.Coercivity from Proposition 4 implies that this sequence is bounded. Since the parameter space is finite dimensional, it has a convergent subsequence, still denoted by Bν , with Bν → B⋆.Closedness of Kα gives B⋆ ∈ Kα. By continuity, 

JI,λ reg (B⋆) = lim  

> ν→∞

JI,λ reg (Bν ) = j⋆.

Thus B⋆ is a minimizer. The proof depends on the finite coefficient-space recursion followed by the complete inverse reconstruction into YI .For a calibration matrix Y , the functional in (107) has the decomposition 

JI,λ reg (B; Y ) = JI,0(B; Y ) + λreg ∥B∥2F.

42 Differentiating twice with respect to B and applying (112) yields 

D2 

> B

JI,λ reg (B; Y )[ ∆, ∆] = D2 

> B

JI,0(B; Y )[ ∆, ∆] + 2 λreg ∥∆∥2F

≥ 2( λreg − ρI )∥∆∥2F. (115) Condition (113) therefore gives strong convexity, and strong convexity supplies uniqueness. The regularization term is independent of the calibration data. Consequently, the second bound in (112) gives 

∥∥∇B JI,λ reg (B; Y1) − ∇ B JI,λ reg (B; Y2)∥∥F ≤ 2LI ∥Y1 − Y2∥F . (116) Let Bi = B⋆(Yi) and ∆ = B1 − B2. The first-order variational inequalities for the two constrained minimizers and the strong monotonicity implied by (115) give 2( λreg − ρI )∥∆∥2F ≤ Re 〈∇B JI,λ reg (B2; Y2) − ∇ B JI,λ reg (B2; Y1), ∆〉

> F

≤ 2LI ∥Y1 − Y2∥F ∥∆∥F. (117) Division by 2( λreg − ρI )∥∆∥F gives (114). □

Remark 7 Positive regularization supplies coercivity and existence on the finite calibration window. When λreg > ρ I , it also dominates the possible negative curvature of the existing reconstruction error, producing strong convexity, uniqueness, and Lipschitz dependence on noisy calibration data. 

The preceding results establish continuity of the coefficient simulator, existence, uniqueness and stability of the physical-space inverse reconstruction under the stated assumptions. The next subsection specializes this two-space construction to the two implemented procedures: Tikhonov and Pareto-based inverse-calibrated recovery. 

3.3.4 Tikhonov and Pareto-Based Recovery Procedures 

Two distinct algorithms for Phase II are presented in this section. For each admissible calibration window, the parameter matrix is first identified from the Phase I coefficients in CI and the resulting NLARX model is simulated freely in Hankel coefficient space. The candidate is then mapped through Hankel space HI into physical space YI , where its selection criteria are evaluated against the measurements on calibration window 

TH . The first procedure selects a model by a scalar Tikhonov inverse-calibration score, whereas the second uses physical-space Pareto objectives followed by a deterministic multi-criteria decision rule. Theorem 2 assures the existence, uniqueness and inverse-stability of the coefficient-space identified model and of the complete inverse-calibrated data recovery performed by each of the two algorithms. For a feasible structure α, let Mα = KI − ℓα > 0 and define 

ΓI,α = [γα,ℓ α · · · γα,K I −1

] ∈ Fpα×Mα ,

C+ 

> I,α

= [cI,ℓ α+1 · · · cI,K I

] ∈ Fr⋆×Mα . (118) 43 Procedure 1 – Tikhonov inverse-calibrated recovery 

For λreg > 0, the fixed-structure coefficient-space identification functional is 

QI,α(B) = 

∥∥∥C+ 

> I,α

− BΓI,α

∥∥∥2F + λreg ∥B∥2F. (119) Let AI be a finite, nonempty family of feasible order triples, so that Mα > 0 for every α ∈ AI . For each structure, minimization of (119) identifies one parameter matrix from coefficient data only. The resulting candidate is then simulated freely through (104), reconstructed in the physical experimental variables through (106), and only then assigned the inverse-calibration score 

STik (α) = JI,λ reg (Bλ, α). (120) Thus, QI,α identifies the candidate in CI , whereas STik selects among the candidates after their reconstruction in YI . These two roles are mathematically distinct. Let λreg > 0, let AI be a finite, nonempty set of admissible NLARX structures, and assume that each α = ( na, n b, n k) ∈ AI uniquely specifies one candidate structure. Then, for every α ∈ AI , the Tikhonov functional (119) admits a unique global minimizer, given by 

Bλreg ,α = C+

> I,α

ΓH

> I,α

(ΓI,αΓH 

> I,α

+ λreg Ipα

)−1 . (121) This fixed-structure minimizer is determined entirely in Hankel coefficient space CI .Its free-run trajectory is then reconstructed in physical space YI , where STik (α) is evaluated. We define the set of structures attaining the minimum Tikhonov selection score by 

A(0) Tik = arg min 

> α∈AI

STik (α). (122) If several structures attain the same minimum score, a unique structure is determined by the following hierarchical minimum-complexity criteria: 

A(1) Tik = arg min 

> α∈A(0) Tik

na,

A(2) Tik = arg min 

> α∈A(1) Tik

nb,

{α⋆

> Tik

} = arg min 

> α∈A(2) Tik

nk. (123) Consequently, the recovered parameter matrix 

BTik = Bλreg ,α⋆ 

> Tik

(124) 44 and the associated reconstructed output ̂

YI,Tik = RI,α⋆ 

> Tik

(BTik ) (125) are uniquely determined. Thus, Tikhonov inverse-calibrated recovery problem is well-posed, and the hierar-chical post-reconstruction physical-space selection procedure produces one uniquely defined inverse-calibrated NLARX model. 

Procedure 2 – Pareto-based inverse-calibrated recovery 

The proposed Pareto-based procedure constructs the coefficient-space matrices for every α ∈ AI , computes its unique parameter candidate from (121), simulates that candidate in Hankel coefficient space CI , and completes the inverse reconstruction in physical space YI before evaluating its Pareto objectives. Let ̂

YI,α = RI,α(Bλ, α), Eα = YI −̂ YI,α. (126) For any two vectors a, b ∈ Rn, define the Pearson correlation coefficient by 

ϱn(a, b) = 



⟨ac, bc⟩∥ac∥2 ∥bc∥2

, ∥ac∥2 ∥bc∥2 > 0,

0, ∥ac∥2 ∥bc∥2 = 0 ,

ac = a − ¯a1n, bc = b − ¯b1n,

¯a = 1

n 1T

> n

a, ¯b = 1

n 1T

> n

b.

(127) The four minimized objectives are 

f1(α) = ∥Eα∥F

∥YI − ¯y1T 

> NI

∥F + ϵmach 

,f2(α) = 1 − 1

m

> m

∑

> i=1

ϱNI

(

YI (i, :) T,̂ YI,α(i, :) T)

,f3(α) = 1

m

> m

∑

> i=1

∣∣ϱNI −1

(Eα(i, 1 : NI − 1) T, Eα(i, 2 : NI )T)∣ ∣ ,f4(α) = ∥Bλ, α∥F

1 + ∥Bλ, α∥F

, fI (α) = [f1 f2 f3 f4

]T ,

(128) representing relative reconstruction error, model reconstruction correlation loss, residual autocorrelation, and parameter penalty, respectively. The first three objectives are defined from the reconstructed physical channels and their physical residuals. The fourth is the regularization component attached to that same reconstructed candidate. Consequently, the objective vector and the Pareto decision score are formed only after the inverse reconstruction has been completed. 45 Definition 11 (Pareto-optimal inverse-calibrated NLARX structure) For α, β ∈ AI , β

dominates α, written β ≺ α, if 

fj (β) ≤ fj (α) (j = 1 , . . . , 4) , fj (β) < f j (α) for at least one j. (129) The Pareto set is 

PI = {α ∈ AI : ∄β ∈ AI with β ≺ α} . (130) 

Let ̂ fj be objective fj normalized over PI , with a zero normalized value when the objective range is zero. For prescribed weights wj > 0, ∑4 

> j=1

wj = 1, define ΨI (α) = 

> 4

∑

> j=1

wĵ fj (α). (131) To define a unique model whenever several Pareto-optimal structures have the same decision score, we introduce the ordered criteria 

q1 = Ψ I , q2 = f1, q3 = f2,q4 = f3, q5 = f4, q6 = na,q7 = nb, q8 = nk.

The hierarchical Pareto decision rule is 

P(0)  

> I

= PI ,

P(s) 

> I

= arg min 

> α∈P(s−1)
> I

qs(α), s = 1 , . . . , 8,

{α⋆

> Pareto

} = P(8)  

> I

.

(132) Rule (132) selects a unique structure α⋆ 

> Pareto

and hence a unique Pareto-based inverse-calibrated model 

BPareto = Bλ, α⋆ 

> Pareto

,̂ YI,Pareto = RI,α⋆ 

> Pareto

(BPareto ). (133) 

Remark 8 (Distinct procedures and uniqueness) Theorem 2 guarantees the existence, unique-ness, and inverse stability of both the identified coefficient-space model and the complete inverse-calibrated data reconstruction produced by each algorithm. For noisy data, the two procedures may select distinct, individually unique models because their decision criteria reflect different selection preferences. Consequently, the theory presented here does not impose the outputs of the two algorithms to coincide. 

3.3.5 Algorithmic Formulation and Computational Complexity 

Having established the mathematical properties of the inverse-calibrated NLARX model and the uniqueness of the two recovery procedures independently, we now 46 present their algorithmic formulations and quantify the associated arithmetic and memory requirements. Algorithm 2 presents the procedure for Tikhonov inverse-calibrated NLARX model. Algorithm 3 presents the procedure for Pareto-based inverse-calibrated NLARX model. 

Algorithm 2 Tikhonov inverse-calibrated NLARX model 

Require: Y , ¯ y, Φr⋆ , Cr⋆ , q, admissible calibration window ( TH , IH ) with TH ⊆ T fin ,finite feasible family AI , λreg > 0. 

Ensure: Unique selected structure α⋆

> Tik

, parameter matrix BTik , simulated coeffi-cients, and reconstructed channels ̂ YI,Tik . 

> 1:

Extract YI and CI according to (97).  

> 2:

for all α ∈ AI do  

> 3:

In CI , construct ΓI,α and C+ 

> I,α

from (118).  

> 4:

Compute the unique ridge matrix Bλ, α from (121).  

> 5:

Simulate the coefficient vectors recursively in CI using (104).  

> 6:

Map the simulated coefficients into HI with Φr⋆ and recover the channels in 

YI with (106).  

> 7:

After physical reconstruction, evaluate STik (α) from (120).  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Select the unique structure using the hierarchical optimization criterion in (123).  

> 10:

return α⋆

> Tik

, BTik , ˜CI,Tik , and ̂ YI,Tik .

Algorithm 3 Pareto-based inverse-calibrated NLARX model 

Require: Y , ¯ y, Φr⋆ , Cr⋆ , q, admissible calibration window ( TH , IH ) with TH ⊆ T fin ,finite feasible family AI , λreg > 0, and positive decision weights {wj }4 

> j=1

with 

∑4 

> j=1

wj = 1. 

Ensure: Unique Pareto-selected structure α⋆

> Pareto

, parameter matrix BPareto , simu-lated coefficients, and reconstructed channels ̂ YI,Pareto . 

> 1:

Extract YI and CI according to (97).  

> 2:

for all α ∈ AI do  

> 3:

In CI , construct ΓI,α and C+ 

> I,α

from (118).  

> 4:

Compute, within the present procedure, the unique matrix Bλ, α from (121).  

> 5:

Simulate the coefficient vectors recursively in CI using (104).  

> 6:

Map through HI and reconstruct ̂ YI,α in YI from (106) and form Eα from (126).  

> 7:

After physical reconstruction, evaluate the four objectives in (128).  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Determine the nondominated set PI from (130).  

> 10:

Normalize the objectives on PI and compute Ψ I from (131).  

> 11:

Select the unique structure using the hierarchical optimization criterion in (132).  

> 12:

return α⋆

> Pareto

, BPareto , ˜CI,Pareto , and ̂ YI,Pareto .47 For the complexity analysis, let 

AI = |AI |, pmax = max 

> α∈AI

pα. (134) Assume that each scalar component of the nonlinear feature map can be evaluated in constant time. Consequently, evaluating all pα features of one regressor requires 

O(pα) operations. For a fixed admissible structure α ∈ AI , constructing the matrices in (118) requires 

O(Mαpα) (135) operations. Forming the Gram matrix and the coefficient–regressor cross-product, computing the Cholesky factorization of the regularized Gram matrix, and solving for all r⋆ output rows require 

O(Mαp2 

> α

+ r⋆Mαpα + p3 

> α

+ r⋆p2

> α

). (136) The positive regularization parameter guarantees that the Gram matrix is Hermitian positive definite, so that the Cholesky factorization is well-defined. Free-run simulation requires Mα = KI − ℓα recursive transitions. Including nonlinear regressor formation and multiplication by the parameter matrix, its cost is 

O(Mαr⋆pα) . (137) Multiplication of the simulated coefficient matrix by the selected modes and uniform anti-diagonal recovery followed by inverse reshaping require, respectively, 

O(q r ⋆KI ) and O(q K I + mN I ) (138) operations. Collecting the leading structure-dependent identification, simulation, and recon-struction costs gives 

Cα = Mαp2 

> α

+ r⋆Mαpα + p3 

> α

+ r⋆p2

> α

+ q r ⋆KI + q K I + mN I . (139) Evaluating the measurement-space reconstruction score of one candidate requires 

O(mN I ) operations. Consequently, Algorithm 2 has the total arithmetic complexity 

O

( ∑

> α∈AI

Cα + AI mN I

)

. (140) Algorithm 3 independently constructs, identifies, simulates, and reconstructs its complete candidate family. It therefore has the same candidate-generation cost as Algorithm 2. Evaluation of the four objectives in (128) requires O(AI mN I ) operations. 48 Since the number of objectives is fixed, direct pairwise Pareto-dominance testing over 

AI candidates requires O(A2 

> I

) comparisons. The total arithmetic complexity of the independent Pareto-based procedure is therefore 

O

( ∑

> α∈AI

Cα + AI mN I + A2

> I

)

. (141) If the candidates are processed sequentially and only their scores, objective values, and structure identifiers are retained, the peak working-memory requirement is bounded by 

O(pmax KI + r⋆KI + p2max + r⋆pmax + qK I + mN I + AI

) . (142) During the Tikhonov search, the current best candidate may be retained and updated whenever the hierarchical selection criterion identifies a preferred structure. During the Pareto-based procedure, only the four objective values and the structure identifier of each candidate need to be stored; after the Pareto decision, the uniquely selected candidate may be recomputed once. Thus, neither procedure requires simultaneous storage of all parameter matrices, simulated coefficient trajectories, or reconstructed measurement trajectories. Each of the two Phase II procedures returns a uniquely selected finite-window coefficient simulator and its measurement-space reconstruction. In both cases, candidate parameters and trajectories are generated in Hankel coefficient space CI , while the Tikhonov or Pareto decision is completed after reconstruction in physical space YI .In particular, Phase II selected the best model for the temporal coefficients, multi-plied the selected Hankel–Koopman energy-modes by the simulated coefficients, and applied anti-diagonal averaging to obtain the corresponding reconstructed physical measurements of the channels. This ordering is the inverse-calibration mechanism. These reconstructed measurements provide the channel inputs for forecasting the coupled quantity of interest in Phase III. In the following phase, α⋆, B⋆, ˜C⋆ 

> I

, and ̂ Y ⋆

> I

denote the outputs obtained from either the Tikhonov-selected or the Pareto-selected Phase II procedure and passed directly to Phase III as inputs. 

## 3.4 Phase III: Finite-Horizon Recursive Forecasting 

NLARX models have been employed in environmental, photovoltaic-power, and air-quality forecasting [94–96], where delayed outputs and exogenous variables are used to represent nonlinear input-output dynamics. In the present work, Phase III introduces an original coupling in which the channel reconstructions provided by Phase II serve as exogenous inputs to the scalar NLARX model for forecasting. Phase III completes the proposed data-driven twin methodology by forecasting a channel-dependent quantity-of-interest over the finite forecast horizon 

Tfor , introduced in Definition 1. Phase III separates two complementary data regimes. On the finite observation horizon Tobs , a scalar NLARX model for the quantity-of-interest is identified from samples of the quantity calculated from the experimental channels values, its parameters being uniquely selected through a correlation-primary Pareto-based procedure. Then, 49 the selected Phase II multi-output NLARX model recursively simulates the retained temporal coefficients in the Hankel coefficient space associated with calibration window 

TH . Their modal reconstruction and anti-diagonal recovery produce the physical four-channel trajectory ̂ Ufor , which drives the recursive quantity-of-interest forecast on the finite forecasting horizon Tfor ⊆ T H .The coupling of the two phases requires the Phase II calibration window to follow the observation horizon and cover the Phase III forecasting horizon. Thus, TH ⊆ T fin ,

Tobs ∩ T H = ∅, and Tfor ⊆ T H , in accordance with (7). This model-mediated transfer of multichannel dynamics from Phase II to the quantity-of-interest forecast in Phase III is the defining coupling of the unified framework proposed in this paper. This section introduces a formal definition of numerical forecasting as the finite recursive composition of the identified one-step numerical evolution operator. It sub-sequently establishes the well-posedness and finite-horizon stability of the resulting forecast, formulates the recursive advancement of the quantity-of-interest over Tfor ,examines the relationship between the NLARX calibration window and the forecast horizon, and presents the corresponding algorithms and computational-complexity analysis. 

3.4.1 Reconstructed Physical Measurements and Quantity-of-Interest Model 

For the Phase II recovery selected by either the Tikhonov-based or the Pareto-based procedure, the physical experimental measurements are reconstructed from the corresponding simulated temporal coefficients as ̂

Y ⋆ 

> I

= ¯ y1T 

> NI

+ AI

(

Φr⋆ ˜C⋆

> I

)

. (143) The columns of ̂ Y ⋆ 

> I

corresponding to the finite forecast horizon Tfor are transferred to the Phase III forecasting stage as the future exogenous inputs and are collected in the matrix ̂

Ufor = [̂ u1 · · · ̂ uNf

] ∈ Fm×Nf , (144) where ̂ uk is the vector of physical channel measurements reconstructed in Phase II from the simulated coefficient dynamics and supplied to the recursive quantity-of-interest forecast at the kth time instant of Tfor .                     

> Definition 12 (Channel-dependent quantity-of-interest model) Let QI:Fm→Rdenote a scalar response associated with the coupled experimental channels, with sampled values
> qk=QI(yk) + ξk,(145) where ξkrepresents measurement error and effects not resolved by the channel vector. The functional form of QIneed not be known. A quantity-of-interest scalar-output model is a data-identified scalar map that advances qkfrom its own past values and from current or delayed channel values. Identification of the scalar quantity-of-interest model uses the experimentally measured channel vectors on observation window Tobs , whereas the physical channel values reconstructed in Phase II drive the recursive forecast on Tfor .

50 Let 1 ≤ NQ < N paired quantity–channel samples be used to identify the scalar-output model of the quantity-of-interest. Denote them by q1, . . . , q NQ and u1, . . . , uNQ ,where the latter are the corresponding experimentally measured channel vectors on 

Tobs , and set 

yQk = qk − μQ

σQ

, vk = diag( σU )−1(uk − μU ), k = 1 , . . . , N Q, (146) where σQ > 0. For the scalar NLARX order triple β = ( nQa , n Qb , n Qk ), we define 

ℓβ = max {nQa , n Qk + nQb − 1}, dβ = nQa + mn Qb . (147) For k = ℓβ + 1 , . . . , N Q, the regressor and the nonlinear feature vector used by the proposed algorithm are 

zβ,k =

[yQk−1 · · · yQk−nQa

vT

> k−nQk

· · · vT  

> k−nQk−nQb+1

]T

,

φQ 

> β,k

= [1 zT 

> β,k

tanh( zβ,k )T (z⊙2

> β,k

)T (z⊙3

> β,k

)T ∥zβ,k ∥22

]T ,pβ = 4 dβ + 2 .

(148) Here ⊙ denotes componentwise exponentiation. The normalized scalar NLARX realization is 

yQk = θT 

> β

φQ 

> β,k

+ εQk . (149) Thus, nQa controls the memory of the quantity-of-interest, nQb the channel-memory depth, and nQk the channel delay. The value nQk = 0 allows the current channel vector to drive the current response: an experimental vector during identification and a Phase II-reconstructed physical-channel vector during forecasting. 

3.4.2 Correlation-Based Pareto Identification of Quantity-of-Interest Scalar-Output Model 

Let Mβ = NQ − ℓβ > 0 and define 

ΦQ, β =

[

φQ  

> β,ℓ β+1

· · · φQ

> β,N Q

]

,

y+ 

> Q, β

=

[

yQℓβ +1 · · · yQNQ

]

.

(150) For λQ > 0, the unique ridge candidate associated with β is 

θT 

> λQ,β

= y+ 

> Q, β

ΦT

> Q, β

(ΦQ, β ΦT 

> Q, β

+ λQIpβ

)−1 . (151) Entries whose magnitude is below the prescribed threshold τQ are set to zero. In the remainder of this subsection, the same symbol θλQ,β denotes this deterministically thresholded candidate. 51 Each candidate is evaluated by free-run simulation on Tobs : the first ℓβ normalized outputs are fixed to their observed values and all subsequent values are generated recursively using the experimentally measured identification channels. With qQ = [ q1, . . . , q NQ ] and eQ, β = qQ −̂ qQ, β , the four minimized objectives are 

f Q 

> 1

(β) = 1 − ϱNQ

(qT

> Q

,̂ qT

> Q, β

) ,f Q 

> 2

(β) = ∥eQ, β ∥2

∥qQ∥2

,f Q 

> 3

(β) = ∣∣ϱNQ−1

(eQ, β (1 : NQ − 1) T, eQ, β (2 : NQ)T)∣ ∣ ,f Q 

> 4

(β) = ∥θλQ,β ∥2

1 + ∥θλQ,β ∥2

,

(152) representing temporal-shape correlation loss, relative amplitude error, residual per-sistence, and parameter magnitude, respectively. Here, ϱNQ and ϱNQ−1 denote the Pearson correlation coefficients defined in Eq. (127) for vectors of lengths NQ and 

NQ − 1, respectively. For a finite feasible family BQ, let PQ be its nondominated subset under the objectives in (152). The final correlation-primary score is 

SQ(β) = C1f Q 

> 1

(β) + C2f Q 

> 2

(β) + C3f Q 

> 3

(β) + C4f Q 

> 4

(β), β ∈ PQ, Ci ∈ R. (153) 

Remark 9 (Correlation-primary decision) The coefficient hierarchy 

C1 ≫ C 2 > C3 > C4

in (153) assigns a distinctly dominant role to temporal-shape correlation in the final decision, while relative amplitude error, residual persistence, and parameter magnitude remain active secondary criteria. Because Pareto filtering precedes the scalar score, a candidate that is strictly inferior in all four objectives cannot be selected by the weighting rule. 

3.4.3 Composed Finite-Horizon Forecasting of Quantity-of-Interest 

Let Nf ∈ N denote the prescribed number of forecasting steps on Tfor . Each step 

h = 1 , . . . , N f corresponds to one sampling instant, one recursively generated value of the quantity-of-interest, and one application of the selected one-step NLARX time-advance operator. To define the delayed channel inputs during the first forecast steps, the future driver sequence is extended to nonpositive indices by repeating its first available column: ̂

v ext  

> j

=

{̂ 

v1, j ≤ 0,̂

vj , j = 1 , . . . , N f . (154) 52 At forecast step h, the quantity-history state, delayed driver block, and normalized regressor are ̂

sh−1 =

[̂ yQ, all  

> NQ+h−1

· · · ̂ yQ, all 

> NQ+h−nQ,⋆ a

]T

,̂

wh =

[(̂ v ext 

> h−nQ,⋆ k

)T (̂ v ext  

> h−nQ,⋆ k−1

)T · · · (̂ v ext   

> h−nQ,⋆ k−nQ,⋆ b+1

)T]T

,

zfor  

> h

= [̂ sT

> h−1

̂ wT

> h

]T , h = 1 , . . . , N f .

(155) The selected one-step NLARX time-advance operator is 

F⋆Q,h (s; w) = 



(θ⋆Q)TφQ

([sT, wT]T)

s1

...

snQ,⋆ a −1

 , h = 1 , . . . , N f , (156) where the shift block is empty when nQ,⋆ a = 1, and φQ has the feature structure in (148) selected by β⋆Q. The recursive state and the forecast in physical units are ̂

sh = F⋆Q,h (̂ sh−1;̂ wh),̂

yQNQ+h = ( ̂sh)1,̂

qNQ+h = μQ + σQ̂ yQNQ+h, h = 1 , . . . , N f .

(157) 

Definition 13 (Finite-horizon numerical forecasting by operator composition) For the fixed reconstructed physical driver blocks supplied by Phase II, define the partial forecast composition by 

C⋆Q,h = F⋆Q,h ( · ;̂w h) ◦ · · · ◦ F ⋆Q, 1( · ;̂w 1), h = 1 , . . . , N f , (158) The finite-horizon numerical forecast on Tfor is the trajectory obtained by applying C⋆Q,h to the terminal observed quantity-history state for h = 1 , . . . , N f and then using the inverse normalization in (157). Hence the forecast is a finite ordered composition of scalar NLARX time-advance operators driven by the physical measurements reconstructed in Phase II from the simulated coefficient dynamics. 

Theorem 3 (Finite-horizon stability of the composed numerical forecast) Let C⋆Q,h be the finite operator composition introduced in Definition 13. Consider two forecasts generated by the same selected NLARX model from initial quantity-history states s(1) 0 and s(2) 0 and delayed driver sequences {w(1)  

> h

}Nf 

> h=1

and {w(2)  

> h

}Nf

> h=1

, respectively. Define 

C(i) 

> Q,h

= F⋆Q,h ( · ; w(i) 

> h

) ◦ · · · ◦ F ⋆Q, 1( · ; w(i)1 ), i = 1 , 2. (159) 

Assume that the quantity-history states and driver blocks visited by the two forecasts belong to a compact set. Since the selected feature map φQ in (148) is continuously differentiable, there exist finite constants LQs , L Qw ≥ 0 such that 

∥∥F⋆Q,h (s1; w1) − F ⋆Q,h (s2; w2)∥∥2

≤ LQs ∥s1 − s2∥2 + LQw ∥w1 − w2∥2

(160) 

53 for every visited state–driver pair and every h = 1 , . . . , N f .Then the two composed forecast states satisfy 

∥∥∥C(1) 

> Q,h

(s(1) 0 ) − C (2) 

> Q,h

(s(2) 0 )

∥∥∥2

≤ (LQs )h∥s(1) 0 − s(2) 0 ∥2 + LQwh∑

> j=1

(LQs )h−j ∥w(1)  

> j

− w(2)  

> j

∥2,

(161) 

for h = 1 , . . . , N f . Consequently, 

∣∣∣̂ q (1)  

> NQ+h

−̂q (2) 

> NQ+h

∣∣∣ ≤ σQ

[

(LQs )h∥s(1) 0 − s(2) 0 ∥2

+ LQwh∑

> j=1

(LQs )h−j ∥w(1)  

> j

− w(2)  

> j

∥2

]

.

(162) 

Thus, the composed numerical forecast is uniquely defined and Lipschitz stable on every prescribed finite forecast horizon. Proof Let 

s(i) 

> h

= C(i)

> Q,h

(s(i)0 ), i = 1 , 2,

and set 

eh = ∥s(1)  

> h

− s(2)  

> h

∥2.

At the hth forecast step, the Lipschitz estimate (160) gives 

eh ≤ LQs eh−1 + LQw ∥w(1)  

> h

− w(2)  

> h

∥2. (163) Successive application of (163) yields 

eh ≤ (LQs )he0 + LQwh∑

> j=1

(LQs )h−j ∥w(1)  

> j

− w(2)  

> j

∥2,

which proves (161). The first component of s(i) 

> h

is the normalized forecast ̂y Q, (i)

> NQ+h

. Therefore, 

∣∣∣̂ y Q, (1)  

> NQ+h

−̂y Q, (2) 

> NQ+h

∣∣∣ ≤ eh.

The inverse normalization in (157) gives 

∣∣∣̂ q (1)  

> NQ+h

−̂q (2) 

> NQ+h

∣∣∣ ≤ σQeh,

and hence (162) follows. Each one-step operator is single-valued and uses the preceding forecast state together with the driver information available at the current step. Accordingly, their ordered finite composition defines one step forecast. All terms in the estimate are finite for h = 1 , . . . , N f ,which completes the proof. □

54 The ratio between the number of paired samples used to identify the scalar NLARX model and the number of recursively forecasted samples is 

RQ/ for = NQ

Nf

. (164) A larger value indicates that more identification samples are available per forecasted step, whereas the absolute horizon Nf determines the number of successive operator applications in (158). Hence, RQ/ for serves as a finite-horizon experimental-design indicator, while the stability constants in Theorem 3 quantify the stability of the selected operator composition over the forecast set traversed by the numerical solution. 

3.4.4 Algorithmic Formulation and Computational Complexity 

Algorithm 4 identifies and uniquely selects the quantity-of-interest scalar-output model from the paired experimental quantity and channel measurements on Tobs . Algorithm 5 then advances the selected scalar model recursively using the physical channel inputs reconstructed in Phase II on Tfor .

Algorithm 4 Correlation-primary Pareto identification of the quantity-of-interest NLARX model 

Require: Experimental quantity samples q1, . . . , q NQ and corresponding experimen-tally measured channel samples u1, . . . , uNQ on Tobs ⊆ T fin , finite order family 

BQ, λQ > 0, threshold τQ ≥ 0, and optional refinement flag. 

Ensure: Unique selected structure β⋆Q, parameter vector θ⋆Q, selected free-run simulation, complete candidate table, and Pareto table.  

> 1:

Normalize the quantity and experimentally measured channels using (146).  

> 2:

for all β ∈ BQ do  

> 3:

Compute ℓβ and discard the structure if NQ − ℓβ ≤ 0.  

> 4:

Construct the nonlinear regressor and target matrices using observed coefficient histories in (150).  

> 5:

Compute (151) and set parameter entries with magnitude below τQ to zero.  

> 6:

Simulate freely from the prescribed initial history and inverse-normalize.  

> 7:

Evaluate the four objectives in (152).  

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Determine the nondominated set PQ. 

> 10:

Minimize (153) on PQ and resolve exact ties by the predefined candidate order.  

> 11:

return β⋆Q, θ⋆Q, selected simulation, and result tables. For complexity, let AQ = |BQ| and Mβ = NQ − ℓβ. For one candidate, feature construction, formation and solution of the ridge system, free-run simulation, and objective evaluation require 

O(Mβ p2 

> β

+ p3 

> β

+ NQpβ

) (165) 55 Algorithm 5 Composed finite-horizon numerical forecast of the quantity-of-interest 

Require: Selected quantity model ( β⋆Q, θ⋆Q); terminal quantity history; physical chan-nel inputs reconstructed in Phase II: ̂ Ufor on Tfor ⊆ T H ; Nf ∈ N, the prescribed number of forecasted quantity samples and, equivalently, the number of recursively composed one-step operators over Tfor .

Ensure: Quantity forecast [ ̂ qNQ+1 , . . . , ̂ qNQ+Nf ] on Tfor . 

> 1:

Normalize the quantity history and future channels.  

> 2:

for h = 1 , . . . , N f do  

> 3:

Assemble the autoregressive quantity lags from the observed history and previously generated values.  

> 4:

Assemble the channel lags using the left-boundary rule in (155).  

> 5:

Evaluate the selected nonlinear feature vector and append the new normalized value from (157).  

> 6:

end for  

> 7:

Inverse-normalize the final Nf values.  

> 8:

return the quantity-of-interest forecast values. operations. Direct Pareto-dominance testing adds O(A2

> Q

) comparisons. Excluding the solver-dependent optional refinement, Algorithm 4 has total arithmetic complexity 

O

 ∑

> β∈BQ

[Mβ p2 

> β

+ p3 

> β

+ NQpβ

] + A2

> Q

 . (166) Because the physically reconstructed channel inputs are supplied by Phase II, the Phase III forecasting cost consists of normalizing the mN f channel entries and recursively evaluating the selected scalar feature map. These operations require 

O

(

Nf

(m + pβ⋆Q

))

. (167) 

## 3.5 End-to-End Algorithm for Data-Driven Twin Modeling and Forecasting 

The complete framework maps finite experimental multichannel data and sampled values of a channel-dependent quantity-of-interest into a finite-horizon forecast. The finite windows used in this phase-to-phase coupling satisfy 

Tobs ∪ T for ⊆ T fin , TH ⊆ T fin , Tfor ⊆ T H , Tobs ∩ T H = ∅.

Moreover, TH temporally succeeds Tobs , in the sense that max Tobs < min TH .

Here, Tobs is the Phase III observation horizon used to identify the quantity-of-interest model, Tfor is its finite forecast horizon, and Tfin is the entire finite modeling horizon. 56 The disjoint Phase II calibration window TH contains Tfor . The Hankel coefficient block associated with TH supplies, after coefficient-space simulation and physical-space inverse reconstruction, the four-channel trajectory throughout the forecast horizon. Phase I constructs an energy-ranked Hankel–Koopman representation from the finite experimental multichannel record. Phase II identifies and simulates the nonlinear evolution of the retained temporal coefficients in the Hankel coefficient space associated with TH , reconstructs the associated four-channel measurements, and evaluates its selection criteria in the physical measurement space on TH . Phase III identifies a scalar NLARX model for the quantity of interest from paired experimental quantity– channel samples on Tobs and then advances this model recursively with the Phase II-reconstructed physical channel inputs ̂ Ufor on Tfor . Thus, the three phases form one ordered transfer from experimental channels, through reduced nonlinear dynamics and reconstructed physical channel measurements, to the forecast of the quantity of interest. Algorithm 6 assembles these operations as a single computational workflow and makes explicit the distinct role of each phase. The Tikhonov-based and Pareto-based Phase II recoveries constitute two alternative branches of the same end-to-end workflow. Algorithm 6 is end-to-end in the sense that the modal representation, the reduced coefficient dynamics, the reconstructed physical measurements, and the quantity-of-interest forecast are constructed successively from finite sampled data. The output of each phase supplies the input required by the next one. The propsed end-to-end numerical algorithm is accompanied by a rigorous math-ematical analysis of its three phases. Theorem 1 establishes the Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition; Theorem 2 proves the existence, uniqueness, and inverse stability of the multi-output NLARX model governing the temporal coefficients in Hankel space; and Theorem 3 establishes the finite-horizon stability of the scalar-output quantity-of-interest forecast. Consequently, under the combined hypotheses of these theorems, the workflow returns a data-driven twin model together with a forward-stable quantity-of-interest forecast over finite-horizon Tfor .

# 4 Numerical Experiments 

This section presents the numerical investigation of the proposed three-phase data-driven twin modeling and forecasting framework, beginning with the data set and computational setting common to all three phases and subsequently reporting the numerical results obtained in each phase. 

## 4.1 Experimental Data and Computational Setting 

Accurate solar-power forecasting is essential for the reliable integration of photovoltaic generation into modern power systems, supporting operational planning, grid stability, energy management, and the efficient utilization of renewable resources [97–100]. Accordingly, a solar power plant is selected as the experimental setting for evaluating the proposed three-phase data-driven twin methodology under multichannel, nonlinear, and weather-dependent operating conditions. The numerical experiment concerns the meteorological drivers of a nominal photovoltaic installation situated in the Deva– Hunedoara region of Romania, at latitude 45 .88 ◦ N and longitude 22 .88 ◦ E. Hourly 57 Algorithm 6 End-to-end data-driven twin model and forecasting workflow 

Require: Multichannel experimental measurements Y on the finite modeling hori-zon Tfin ; temporal sets satisfying (7); quantity-of-interest samples q1, . . . , q NQ on 

Tobs ; finite forecast horizon Tfor ; and regularization, order-search, and selection parameters required by Algorithms 1–5. 

Ensure: Selected Koopman-energy triplet family, including the energy eigenvalues, Hankel–Koopman energy modes, and coefficients; selected Phase II multi-output coefficient simulator and reconstructed physical measurements; selected quantity-of-interest scalar-output model; and the finite-horizon forecast [ ̂ qNQ+1 , . . . , ̂ qNQ+Nf ]. 

Phase I: Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition (HKFED)  

> 1:

Apply Algorithm 1 to Y and obtain Tr⋆ = ( ΛG,r ⋆ , Φr⋆ , Cr⋆ ), its cardinality r⋆,and the corresponding reconstructed measurements. 

Phase II: Inverse-calibrated multi-output NLARX model  

> 2:

Restrict the measurements and selected coefficients to the admissible calibration window ( TH , IH ), chosen so that TH ⊆ T fin and Tfor ⊆ T H . 

> 3:

Identify and freely simulate every Phase II NLARX candidate in the associated Hankel coefficient space; reconstruct each candidate by modal multiplication and anti-diagonal averaging, and evaluate its Tikhonov or Pareto selection criteria in the physical measurement space on TH . 

> 4:

if the Tikhonov-based recovery is desired then  

> 5:

Apply Algorithm 2.  

> 6:

else  

> 7:

Apply Algorithm 3 for Pareto-based recovery.  

> 8:

end if  

> 9:

Denote the uniquely selected outputs of the prescribed Phase II procedure by α⋆,

B⋆, ˜C⋆ 

> I

, and ̂ Y ⋆ 

> I

.

Phase III: Finite-horizon recursive forecasting  

> 10:

Pair q1, . . . , q NQ with the experimentally measured channel columns on Tobs , and form the reconstructed input matrix ̂ Ufor from the columns of ̂ Y ⋆ 

> I

indexed by Tfor . 

> 11:

Apply Algorithm 4 and obtain the unique correlation-primary structure β⋆Q,parameter vector θ⋆Q, and selected free-run simulation.  

> 12:

Apply Algorithm 5 to the terminal observed quantity history and ̂ Ufor , and compose the selected one-step numerical operators over Nf steps.  

> 13:

return Φ r⋆ , Cr⋆ , α⋆, B⋆, ˜C⋆ 

> I

,̂ Y ⋆ 

> I

, β⋆Q, θ⋆Q, and [ ̂ qNQ+1 , . . . , ̂ qNQ+Nf ]. historical observations were obtained from the Historical Weather API [101] for the interval 1 January–31 March 2026. The complete downloaded record contains ambient temperature at 2 m, relative humidity at 2 m, wind speed at 10 m, cloud cover, and shortwave solar radiation. Invalid observations are removed, the remaining samples are sorted chronologically, and duplicated time stamps are discarded before the observation, calibration and forecast windows are formed. Shortwave radiation is used to distinguish daytime observations from nighttime values and, together with ambient temperature, is subsequently used to construct 58 the photovoltaic quantity-of-interest. More precisely, only observations for which the shortwave radiation exceeds 5 W/m 2 are retained. The daylight filter is applied after the hourly record has been downloaded, hence, the retained daytime observations are chronologically ordered samples. In accordance with (8) and (9), Phase I is applied to the snapshot matrix 

Y = [y1 y2 · · · yN

] =



(y1)1 (y2)1 · · · (yN )1

(y1)2 (y2)2 · · · (yN )2

(y1)3 (y2)3 · · · (yN )3

(y1)4 (y2)4 · · · (yN )4

 ∈ Rm×N . (168) Thus, the kth column of (168) is the four-component measurement vector yk recorded at tk, whereas each row contains the complete finite record of one measured channel over finite modeling horizon Tfin . From the first to the fourth row, the channels are cloud cover, ambient temperature at 2 m, wind speed at 10 m, and relative humidity at 2 m. Data source and variables used in the numerical experiment are presented in Table 6 and thereby support reproducibility of the numerical study.                                       

> Table 6 Data source, variables, and temporal partition used in the numerical experiment. Item Symbol or channel Setting Geographical location –(45 .88 ◦N,22 .88 ◦E) Data source –Historical Weather API [101] Downloaded interval –1 January–31 March 2026 Temporal resolution –1 h Number of measured channels m4Modeling samples N461 Finite modeling horizon Tfin [1 ,461] Row 1 of Y–cloud cover [%] Row 2 of Y–ambient temperature at 2 m [ ◦C] Row 3 of Y–wind speed at 10 m [m/s] Row 4 of Y–relative humidity at 2 m [%] Daylight/response variable –shortwave radiation [W/m 2]Nominal PV parameters –(10 kW ,−0.0035 ◦C−1,46 ◦C)

## 4.2 Phase I Results: Hankel–Koopman Finite-Horizon Energy Decomposition 

Phase I applies Algorithm 1 (HKFED) to the centered form of (168). For the present values m = 4 and N = 461, the serialization in (14) gives NH = mN = 1844. The imposed Hankel delay depth q = 200 is consistent with q ≈ ⌊ N/ 2⌋ and, through (15), gives K = NH − q + 1 = 1645. The computation then follows the Koopman approx-imation, finite-horizon energy ranking, Pareto selection, and anti-diagonal recovery established in Phase I. Its output is the selected candidate Tr⋆ = ( ΛG,r ⋆ , Φr⋆ , Cr⋆ ), 59 together with the reconstructed matrix ̂ Y in (89). In the present experiment the per-sistence horizon is fixed at L = 100. The parameters and matrix dimensions used in Phase I are reported in Table 7.                                           

> Table 7 Phase I HKFED parameters and data-dependent matrix dimensions. Quantity Symbol Value Serialized centered-data length NH=mN 1844 Imposed Hankel delay depth (rows) q200 Hankel columns K=NH−q+ 1 1645 Hankel-matrix size q×K200 ×1645 Data-supported rank p= rank( H0)≤min {q, K −1}200 Operator horizon L100 Energy-retention level η0.9999 (99 .99%) Dimension-preference weight αdim 0.03 Weak dimension penalty βdim 0.02 Admissible dimension interval [rmin , r max ][100 ,180] Preferred dimension rtar 150

4.2.1 Energy Spectrum and Finite-Horizon Triplet Ranking 

Figure 1 presents the spectrum of Koopman energy operator matrix Gp, displayed in the decreasing order μ1 ≥ · · · ≥ μp. The highlighted subset {μπℓ : ℓ = 1 , . . . , r ⋆} are the spectral components of the modal triplets retained by the finite-horizon Pareto procedure, belonging to the selected triplet family Tr⋆ = ( ΛG,r ⋆ , Φr⋆ , Cr⋆ ). They are Koopman-energy eigenvalues, linked to Koopman spectrum through (57). The two factors entering the proposed finite-horizon modal energy are reported separately in Fig. 2. Figure 2a shows finite-horizon modal energies E(100)  

> πℓ

of the Hankel– Koopman energy modes in decreasing order, for finite horizon L = 100, used by Algorithm 1. Figure 2b reports finite-horizon persistence factors P (100)  

> πℓ

in the same ordering. Values near 101 correspond to μπℓ ≈ 1, whereas smaller or larger values indicate, respectively, attenuating or amplifying energetic directions over the prescribed finite horizon. Decreasing-energy rank ℓ corresponds to the complete modal triplet 

tπℓ = ( μπℓ , ϕπℓ , cT 

> πℓ

). 

4.2.2 Pareto Selection of the Retained Koopman-Energy Candidate 

The p = 200 Koopman-energy candidates were evaluated using the relative Hankel reconstruction error εr and the matrix cosine similarity γr, defined in Eqs. (74) and (75). Each index r ∈ R specifies the complete candidate Tr = ( ΛG,r , Φr, Cr) .

Figure 3a presents the candidates in the accuracy plane ( εr, γ r). The upper-left region represents values of εr near zero and values of γr near one. The Pareto classification was computed from the penalized minimization objectives F1 and F2

in Eq. (77). The open circles represent all candidates, the black square identifies the 60 Fig. 1 Spectrum of the Koopman energy operator Gp = ˜KH 

> p

˜Kp. The eigenvalues are shown in decreasing order, and those belonging to the selected triplet family Tr⋆ = ( ΛG,r ⋆ , Φr⋆ , Cr⋆ ) are highlighted. The unretained data-supported Koopman-energy directions are shown for reference. 

Pareto-optimal candidate with r = 200, and the blue diamond identifies the selected candidate with r⋆ = 180. For the present experiment, the Pareto-optimal set is P = {200 }. The prescribed admissible set is Radm = {100 , . . . , 180 }, corresponding to [ rmin , r max ] = [100 , 180]. Hence, P ∩ R adm = ∅, and Eq. (82) gives C = Radm .The normalized decision score J(r) was evaluated for every r ∈ C .Figure 3b reports εr and γr as functions of the retained cardinality r. The dotted vertical line marks the prescribed preferred dimension rtar = 150. The dashed vertical line marks r⋆ = 180, obtained from Eq. (84). At r = rtar , the dimension-deviation term ̂ χr is zero. The selected value r⋆ = 180 is the minimizer of J(r) over C.The Phase I selection is therefore 

T180 = ( ΛG, 180 , Φ180 , C180 ) .

This candidate contains 180 of the p = 200 data-supported modal triplets and has the retained-rank fraction r⋆

p = 180 200 = 0 .90 .

The modes Φ180 and the coefficient matrix C180 provide the reduced modal representation used in the subsequent phases. The principal outcome of the discrete decision procedure is the selected triplet family Tr⋆ . Table 8 summarizes the Phase I finite-horizon Pareto selection data. For q = 200, K = 1645, and r⋆ = 180, Eq. (26) gives CR r⋆ = 0 .9907 < 1. Thus, storing the two factors separately does not provide entrywise storage compression in this experiment. The reduced-order character is instead the explicit spectral truncation 61 Fig. 2 a. Finite-horizon modal energies of the Hankel–Koopman energy modes for L = 100. The abscissa gives the decreasing-energy rank ℓ, and the ordinate gives E(100)  

> πℓ

.b. Finite-horizon persistence factors P (100)  

> πℓ

= ∑100  

> k=0

μkπℓ for the selected Hankel–Koopman energy modes. Values near 101 correspond to μπℓ ≈ 1, whereas smaller or larger values indicate, respectively, attenuating or amplifying energetic directions over the prescribed finite horizon. 

Table 8 Summary of the Phase I finite-horizon Pareto selection. Reported quantity Symbol Numerical value Number of Pareto-optimal candidates |P| 200 Selected reduced dimension r⋆ 180 Retained-rank fraction r⋆/p 0.90 Nominal factor-storage compression ratio CR r⋆ 0.9907 Relative Hankel reconstruction error εr⋆ 0.0696 Matrix cosine similarity γr⋆ 0.9976 Phase I execution time – 1.3761 s 

r⋆/p = 0 .90 < 1, consistent with Definition 3; its computational role is to restrict the recursively evolved coefficient state to the selected modal subspace. 62 Fig. 3 Pareto selection of the retained Phase I Koopman-energy candidate. a. Candidate distribution in the accuracy plane (εr , γ r ). Each open circle represents Tr =(ΛG,r , Φr , Cr ) for r ∈ R . The black square marks the Pareto-optimal candidate r = 200, and the blue diamond marks the selected candidate r⋆ = 180. The upper-left region corresponds to εr → 0 and 

γr → 1. b. Relative Hankel reconstruction error εr and matrix cosine similarity γr as functions of the retained cardinality r. The dotted vertical line marks rtar = 150, and the dashed vertical line marks r⋆ = 180, obtained by minimizing the normalized decision score J(r) over C = {100 , . . . , 180 }.

4.2.3 Orthogonality and Reconstruction of the Experimental Channels 

The selected modal matrix Φr⋆ = Φ180 was first assessed through its Gram matrix 

GΦ,r ⋆ = ΦH 

> r⋆

Φr⋆ . (169) According to Proposition 3, exact orthonormality gives GΦ,r ⋆ = Ir⋆ . Figure 4 displays the absolute values of the entries of GΦ,r ⋆ . The 180 unit-height blocks lie on the main diagonal and represent the self-inner products of the retained modes. The numerical diagnostics in Table 9 quantify the structure shown in Fig. 4. The Frobenius and spectral norms of GΦ,r ⋆ − Ir⋆ are 3 .1037 × 10 −14 and 4 .8395 × 10 −15 ,respectively. The largest absolute inner product between two distinct modes is 9 .2981 ×

63 Fig. 4 Three-dimensional representation of the absolute Gram matrix |ΦH 

> r⋆

Φr⋆ | for the r⋆ = 180 retained Hankel–Koopman energy modes. The unit-height diagonal blocks represent |⟨ ϕi, ϕi⟩| = 1. The off-diagonal values |⟨ ϕi, ϕj ⟩| , i̸ = j, are zero to machine precision. The figure provides the numerical verification of Proposition 3. 

Table 9 Orthogonality diagnostics for the r⋆ = 180 retained Hankel–Koopman energy modes. Diagnostic Numerical value 

∥ΦH 

> r⋆

Φr⋆ − Ir⋆ ∥F 3.1037 × 10 −14 

∥ΦH 

> r⋆

Φr⋆ − Ir⋆ ∥2 4.8395 × 10 −15 

max 

> i̸=j

|(ΦH 

> r⋆

Φr⋆ )ij | 9.2981 × 10 −16 

max 

> i

|(ΦH 

> r⋆

Φr⋆ )ii − 1| 4.4409 × 10 −16 

10 −16 , and the maximum deviation of the modal inner products ϕH 

> j

ϕj from unity is 4 .4409 × 10 −16 . These values verify the orthonormality of the computed modes to machine precision and confirm the numerical implementation of the projection in Eq. (61). The selected Hankel reconstruction ̂ Hr⋆ = Φr⋆ Cr⋆ was returned to the four experimental channels using the uniform anti-diagonal recovery in Eq. (88), inverse reshaping, and restoration of the reference state in Eq. (89). For channel i, the reconstruction was evaluated through the relative error, root-mean-square error, mean absolute error, and Pearson correlation coefficient (127): 64 ei, rel =

∥∥∥Y (i, :) −̂ Y (i, :) 

∥∥∥2

∥Y (i, :) ∥2

, RMSE i = 1

√N

∥∥∥Y (i, :) −̂ Y (i, :) 

∥∥∥2 ,

MAE i = 1

N

∥∥∥Y (i, :) −̂ Y (i, :) 

∥∥∥1 , Ri = ϱN

(

Y (i, :) T,̂ Y (i, :) T)

.

(170) The quantities ei, rel and Ri are dimensionless. The RMSE and MAE retain the physical unit of each measured channel. Table 10 reports the accuracy metric values.                             

> Table 10 Channelwise Phase I HKFED reconstruction metrics over the N= 461 observation samples after uniform anti-diagonal recovery.
> Channel Unit ei, rel RMSE iMAE iRi
> Cloud cover %0.0648 5.7629 2.6034 0.9821 Ambient temperature at 2 m ◦C0.1281 0.7416 0.4350 0.9918 Wind speed at 10 m m/s 0.5975 1.2885 0.4679 0.5777 Relative humidity at 2 m %0.0729 6.0580 4.0726 0.9034

Figure 5 illustrates the reconstruction in the original measurement variables. For cloud cover, the reconstructed curve follows the high-cloud intervals and the abrupt reductions present in the observed record. The observed and reconstructed temperature curves remain closely aligned throughout the finite modeling horizon. For wind speed, Fig. 5 shows localized reconstruction discrepancies at the endpoints of this channel and the recovered low-amplitude variations within the record. Relative humidity reconstructed curve follows the measured variations over the complete finite modeling horizon. The orthogonality diagnostics and the channelwise reconstruction results complete the numerical assessment of the selected Phase I candidate. The matrix Φ180 satisfies the orthogonality relation in Eq. (60) to machine precision, and ̂ Y supplies the four recovered experimental channels used by the subsequent phases. 

## 4.3 Phase II: Inverse-Calibrated Multi-Output NLARX Results 

Phase II identifies the reduced evolution map Mr⋆ introduced in (24), from the tem-poral coefficients of the r⋆ = 180 Hankel–Koopman energy modes retained in Phase I. The purpose of this phase is to construct a coupled multi-output NLARX realization of the Hankel-Koopman model temporal coefficients. Accordingly, each candidate is identified and simulated recursively in Hankel coefficient space CI , multiplied by the fixed modal matrix Φ180 , and assessed after uniform anti-diagonal recovery in the orig-inal four measurement variables space YI . In particular, Tikhonov and Pareto-based 65 Fig. 5 Observed experimental channels and their Phase I HKFED reconstructions obtained from the selected candidate T180 after uniform anti-diagonal recovery. From top to bottom, the axes show cloud cover, ambient temperature at 2 m, wind speed at 10 m, and relative humidity at 2 m. The curves with open circles represent the observed data, and the blue curves with square markers represent the HKFED reconstructions. All four axes use the chronological daytime-sample index k = 1 , . . . , 461. 

procedures are evaluated on the prescribed finite calibration window, after the com-plete map CI → HI → YI . This is the numerical realization of the inverse-calibration principle introduced in Section 3.3. Algorithms 2 and 3 are tested on four finite calibration windows T iH , i = 1 , . . . , 4, of different start times and lengths. Each window is contained in the global finite modeling horizon Tfin = [1 , 461]. 66 Both independent recovery procedures were applied to the same finite family AI of admissible NLARX order triples. Algorithm 2 selected a candidate by the scalar inverse-calibration score STik , whereas Algorithm 3 first determined the nondominated set in the four-objective space and then applied the hierarchical decision rule in Eq. (132). The numerical settings common to the two searches are summarized in Table 11.                                     

> Table 11 Phase II inverse-calibrated multi-output NLARX parameters and finite calibration windows. Quantity Symbol Value Selected Phase I dimension r⋆180 Number of experimental channels m4First calibration window T1
> H[288 ,388] Second calibration window T2
> H[360 ,460] Third calibration window T3
> H[310 ,460] Fourth calibration window T4
> H[300 ,450] Tested NLARX order triple α= ( na, n b, n k)(1 : 8 ,1 : 4 ,1 : 3) Tikhonov regularization parameter λreg 10 −4
> Pareto normalized decision weights (w1, w 2, w 3, w 4)(0 .3,0.5,0.1,0.1)

4.3.1 Selected NLARX Structure and Agreement of the Two Procedures 

For all four finite calibration windows T iH , i = 1 , . . . , 4, the Tikhonov and Pareto-based procedures selected the same admissible order triple, 

α⋆ 

> Tik

= α⋆ 

> Pareto

= α⋆ = (8, 1, 1). (171) Because both algorithms compute the unique regularized matrix in Eq. (121) for a fixed candidate, the common structure in (171) yields, up to working precision, 

BTik = BPareto = B⋆,

˜CI,Tik = ˜CI,Pareto = ˜C⋆ 

> I

,̂

YI,Tik =̂ YI,Pareto =̂ Y ⋆ 

> I

.

(172) The equality in (172) is a result of this numerical experiment, not an equality imposed by the theory. More precisely, the same admissible candidate is the unique least element of both decision orders: the order induced by the Tikhonov score and its hierarchical minimum-complexity tie-break, and the order induced by Pareto nondominance, Ψ I , and the hierarchical criteria q1, . . . , q 8. As stated in the Remark 8, the two procedures may select different unique models for other data sets or candidate families. 67 Table 12 reports the values associated with the common selected candidate while retaining the distinct decision quantities of the two procedures on the first calibration window T 1 

> H

.    

> Table 12 Phase II NLARX model-selection results for the independent Tikhonov and Pareto-based recovery procedures on the first calibration window T1
> H.

Reported quantity Symbol Tikhonov Pareto based Selected order triple α⋆ (8, 1, 1) (8, 1, 1)

Required initial history ℓα⋆ 8 8Number of nonlinear features pα⋆ 2881 2881 Parameter-matrix norm ∥B⋆∥F 5.1481 5.1481 Tikhonov selection score STik 8.0797 × 10 −3 –Relative reconstruction f1 – 0.2708 Mean correlation loss f2 – 0.0588 Residual autocorrelation f3 – 0.5702 Parameter penalty f4 – 0.8373 Pareto decision score ΨI – 0.1395 Number of Pareto-optimal candidates |PI | – 83 Phase II execution time – 18.3363 s 18.4773 s 

4.3.2 Pareto Front in the Objective Space 

The Pareto-based procedure evaluates every admissible structure through the four minimization objectives in Eq. (128): relative reconstruction error f1, mean channel-correlation loss f2, mean absolute lag-one residual correlation f3, and normalized parameter penalty f4.The objectives are grouped into the paired Euclidean quantities 

P12 (α) = (f1(α)2 + f2(α)2)1/2 , P34 (α) = (f3(α)2 + f4(α)2)1/2 . (173) The quantity P12 combines relative reconstruction error and mean channel-correlation loss, whereas P34 combines mean absolute lag-one residual correlation and normalized parameter penalty. These paired quantities are introduced as a visualization technique. Pareto dominance, objective normalization, and final model selection remain defined in the original four-objective space fI = [f1 f2 f3 f4

]T .

Figure 6 makes the compromise between measurement-space accuracy and residual regularity–model complexity directly visible. The finite Pareto-optimal structure is located at (P12 , P 34 

) ≈ (0 .74002 , 1.08732); it attains the smallest P34 among the displayed Pareto-optimal candidates while maintaining P12 essentially at its minimum. 68 Fig. 6 Paired-objective representation of the Phase II multi-objective model-selection problem. The horizontal coordinate P12 = ( f 21 + f 22 )1/2 combines relative reconstruction error and mean channel-correlation loss, whereas the vertical coordinate P34 = ( f 23 + f 24 )1/2 combines mean absolute lag-one residual correlation and normalized parameter penalty. Open circles denote candidates having finite values of all four objectives, black squares identify the finite Pareto-optimal subset, and the blue diamond marks the structure selected by the normalized decision score Ψ I and the hierarchical rule in Eq. (132). 

4.3.3 Measurement-Space Reconstruction of Channels 

Theorem 2 established the existence, uniqueness and inverse stability of the mod-els returned by the two implemented procedures. This subsection provides their measurement-space numerical realization for all four finite calibration windows T iH ,

i = 1 , . . . , 4 (see Table 11). The selected coefficient simulator is advanced recursively in the Hankel coefficient space associated with the prescribed calibration window, and its trajectory is mapped through the selected Hankel–Koopman energy modes and the anti-diagonal recovery operator to obtain the four reconstructed physical experimental channels. For both Tikhonov/Pareto-based inverse-calibrated NLARX reconstruction, the physical reconstruction accuracy of channel i was quantified by the relative error and Pearson correlation coefficient (127): 

ei, rel =

∥∥∥YI (i, :) −̂ YI,ρ (i, :) 

∥∥∥2

∥YI (i, :) ∥2

, Ri = ϱNI

(

YI (i, :) T,̂ YI,ρ (i, :) T)

. (174) The two quantities are dimensionless and use the complete finite calibration window, including the prescribed initial-history samples. Their channelwise values are reported in Table 13 for every considered calibration window T iH , i = 1 , . . . , 4. 69 Table 13 Channelwise Phase II inverse-calibrated reconstruction metrics over the four calibration windows T iH , i = 1 , . . . , 4.                                           

> Tikhonov/Pareto-based Channel Metric T1
> HT2
> HT3
> HT4
> H
> Cloud cover ei, rel 0.0285 0.0293 0.0286 0.0280
> Ri0.9998 0.9995 0.9996 0.9996 Ambient temperature at 2 m
> ei, rel 0.0682 0.1016 0.0872 0.0818
> Ri0.9944 0.9896 0.9901 0.9935 Wind speed at 10 m
> ei, rel 0.1489 0.2862 0.25102 0.1799
> Ri0.9353 0.8738 0.8826 0.9234 Relative humidity at 2 m
> ei, rel 0.1091 0.1158 0.1127 0.1147
> Ri0.8350 0.8798 0.8633 0.8566

The consistently small relative errors and high correlation coefficients across all four calibration windows demonstrate the accuracy and robustness of the inverse-calibrated reconstruction, with particularly strong agreement for cloud cover and ambient temperature and satisfactory performance for the more variable wind-speed and relative-humidity channels. The four finite calibration windows T iH , i = 1 , . . . , 4, were selected for the subse-quent application of the finite-horizon forecasting procedure developed in Phase III. Accordingly, the physical reconstruction has a direct computational role in the end-to-end methodology: the common Tikhonov/Pareto reconstruction ̂ Y ⋆ 

> I

(172), supplies the channel data input required by the Phase III quantity-of-interest model, in accordance with Eq. (143). For the present experimental data, the Tikhonov-based and Pareto-based procedures recover the same admissible NLARX candidate as the unique least element of their respective decision orders. Consequently, their simulated coefficient trajectories and reconstructed physical-channel trajectories coincide at every corresponding sample. The blue solid curves and the green dashed curves in Figures 7-10 represent these coincident solutions. This equality is a numerical property of the selected candidate for the present data, while the two recovery procedures retain their independent definitions in the theoretical formulation. Thus, Phase II produces a theoretically supported and numerically satisfactory finite-window coefficient-space simulation together with its physical-space reconstruc-tion of the experimental channels. These reconstructed channels constitute the input layer of the forecasting procedure. The following section applies the Phase III procedure to these channel data, and generates a recursive prediction of a channels-dependent quantity-of-interest over the prescribed finite forecast horizon. 70 Fig. 7 Physical-space reconstruction based on the inverse-calibrated multi-output NLARX coefficient model, and corresponding channelwise residuals over the finite calibration window T 1 

> H

= [288 , 388], followed by their respective residuals. The Tikhonov-based and Pareto-based trajectories coincide because both procedures select the same admissible NLARX candidate for the present experimental data. 

71 Fig. 8 Physical-space reconstruction based on the inverse-calibrated multi-output NLARX coefficient model, and corresponding channelwise residuals over the finite calibration window T 2 

> H

= [360 , 460], followed by their respective residuals. The Tikhonov-based and Pareto-based trajectories coincide because both procedures select the same admissible NLARX candidate for the present experimental data. 

72 Fig. 9 Physical-space reconstruction based on the inverse-calibrated multi-output NLARX coefficient model, and corresponding channelwise residuals over the finite calibration window T 3 

> H

= [310 , 460], followed by their respective residuals. The Tikhonov-based and Pareto-based trajectories coincide because both procedures select the same admissible NLARX candidate for the present experimental data. 

73 Fig. 10 Physical-space reconstruction based on the inverse-calibrated multi-output NLARX coefficient model, and corresponding channelwise residuals over the finite calibration window T 4 

> H

= [300 , 450], followed by their respective residuals. The Tikhonov-based and Pareto-based trajectories coincide because both procedures select the same admissible NLARX candidate for the present experimental data. 

74 4.4 Phase III: Finite-Horizon Recursive Forecasting Results 

This section presents the numerical realization of the Phase III forecasting theory developed in Section 3.4. Its scope comprises the construction of the quantity-of-interest QI from the four experimental channels, the correlation-primary identification of a scalar NLARX model on four finite observation horizons T i

> obs

, and the recursive evaluation of four finite-horizon forecasts T i

> for

, i = 1 , ..., 4. In each experiment, the quantity-of-interest model is identified from experimental four-channel data on T i

> obs

.On every T i 

> for

⊆ T iH , the selected Phase II multi-output NLARX model simulates the retained temporal coefficients in the Hankel coefficient space associated with T iH . Their inverse reconstruction supplies the physical cloud-cover, temperature, wind-speed, and relative-humidity trajectories that serve as the exogenous drivers of the recursive power forecast. Forecast accuracy is assessed through the Pearson correlation coefficient, the relative error, and the identification-to-forecast ratio in Eq. (164). The numerical procedure implements the finite operator composition in Eq. (158), whose construction is specified in Definition 13. 

4.4.1 Solar-Plant Power as the Quantity-of-Interest 

The channel-dependent quantity QI in Definition 12 is specified here as the normalized solar-plant output power. The channel order follows Eq. (168): cloud cover, ambient temperature, wind speed, and relative humidity. At the kth hourly sample, the quantity-of-interest is expressed as 

QI(yk) = Pmax [1 − αc(yk)1] [1 − γT

((yk)2 − Tref 

)] 

× [1 + γw(yk)3] [1 − γh(yk)4] . (175) The parameter values defining the four channel-dependent factors in Eq. (175) are collected in Table 14.                        

> Table 14 Parameters of the normalized solar-plant power quantity QI.
> Quantity Parameter Value Unit Normalized reference power Pmax 1dimensionless Cloud attenuation coefficient αc0.85 dimensionless Reference temperature Tref 25 ◦CTemperature coefficient γT0.004 ◦C−1
> Wind-cooling coefficient γw0.015 s m −1
> Humidity attenuation coefficient γh0.20 dimensionless

The four multiplicative factors represent cloud attenuation, temperature-dependent conversion, wind cooling, and humidity attenuation, respectively. The sampled quantity in Eq. (145) is qk = QI(yk), with ξk = 0 for the constructed power data. The past samples qk provide the autoregressive power history. The experimentally measured 75 channel vectors uk convey the exogenous information used to identify the power NLARX model on T i

> obs

. During forecasting on T i

> for

, the four-channel vectors obtained by physical inverse reconstruction of the coefficient trajectories simulated by the selected Phase II multi-output NLARX model provide the exogenous inputs. The two data regimes therefore contribute differently to the quantity-of-interest model in Eq. (149) for the present solar-power application. 

4.4.2 Correlation-Primary Identification of the QI NLARX Model 

A separate scalar NLARX model was identified for quantity-of-interest QI on each of the four finite observation horizons T i

> obs

. In each case, NQ is the number of paired experimental power–channel samples on that observation horizon. For each experiment, the Phase II calibration window T iH begins at the first sampling instant following T i

> obs

,while its length is prescribed independently by its terminal index. The admissible structure family BQ introduced in the theoretical formulation was 

BQ =

{

(nQa , n Qb , n Qk ) : nQa ∈ { 1, . . . , 12 }, n Qb ∈ { 1, . . . , 6}, n Qk ∈ { 0, . . . , 3}

}

. (176) The ridge parameter was λQ = 10 −6, and coefficients with magnitude below τQ =10 −8 were assigned a zero value. Every feasible model was evaluated by the four objectives in Eq. (152): temporal-shape correlation loss f Q 

> 1

, relative amplitude error f Q 

> 2

,residual persistence f Q 

> 3

, and parameter magnitude f Q 

> 4

. Pareto filtering was followed by minimization of the correlation-primary score SQ in Eq. (153). This decision procedure assigns the leading role to temporal-shape correlation and retains the contribution of relative amplitude error, residual persistence, and parameter magnitude. Table 15 reports the experiment-specific observation and forecast settings together with the identification fields for the four quantity-of-interest NLARX models.   

> Table 15 Experiment-specific Phase III settings and selected correlation-primary NLARX results for the solar-plant power quantity of interest QI.

Reported quantity Symbol T 1obs T 2obs T 3obs T 4obs 

Finite observation horizon T i 

> obs

[1 , 287] [1 , 359] [1 , 309] [1 , 299] Paired identification samples NQ 287 359 309 299 Finite forecast horizon T i 

> for

[288 , 335] [360 , 431] [310 , 409] [300 , 449] Phase II calibration window T iH [288 , 388] [360 , 460] [310 , 460] [300 , 450] Forecast samples Nf 48 72 100 150 Selected order triple β⋆Q (7 , 2, 0) (12 , 2, 0) (9 , 2, 0) (12 , 4, 0) Correlation loss f Q 

> 1

(β⋆Q) 3 .1641 × 10 −14 1.3212 × 10 −14 2.498 × 10 −14 4.5408 × 10 −14 

Relative amplitude error f Q 

> 2

(β⋆Q) 1 .7339 × 10 −7 1.0956 × 10 −7 1.5385 × 10 −7 2.0868 × 106 −7Residual persistence f Q 

> 3

(β⋆Q) 0.0022 4.0479 × 10 −3 3.8305 × 10 −3 4.5837 × 10 −3

Parameter magnitude f Q 

> 4

(β⋆Q) 0.4892 0.4910 0.4900 0.4896 Final decision score SQ(β⋆Q) 5 .003 × 10 −3 5.113 × 10 −3 5.092 × 10 −3 5.1255 × 10 −3

76 4.4.3 Finite-Horizon Forecasts of Quantity-of-Interest 

Four forecasting experiments were conducted with forecast lengths Nf = 48, 72, 100, and 150 hourly samples, respectively. Here, NQ is the number of paired experimental power–channel samples used to identify the scalar power NLARX model on T i

> obs

,whereas Nf is the number of recursively generated power samples, and equivalently the number of composed one-step operators, on T i

> for

. Each experiment finite windows reported in Table 15, satisfy 

T i 

> obs

∪ T i 

> for

⊆ T fin , T iH ⊆ T fin , T i 

> for

⊆ T iH ,

T i 

> obs

∩ T iH = ∅, max T i 

> obs

< min T iH , i = 1 , . . . , 4. (177) For each experiment, the selected model ( β⋆Q, θ⋆Q) is identified from experimental power samples qk paired with experimental four-channel vectors uk on T i

> obs

. On T i

> for

,the selected Phase II multi-output NLARX model recursively simulates the retained temporal coefficients in the Hankel coefficient space associated with T iH . The inverse reconstruction using Koopman energy modes produces the four physical channel trajectories that form ̂ Ufor in Eq. (144) and drive the recursive power forecast in Eq. (157). Crucially, the finite forecast horizons are contained in the Phase II calibration windows reported in Table 15: T 1for ⊆ T 1 

> H

= [288 , 388], T 2for ⊆ T 2 

> H

= [360 , 460], T 3for ⊆T 3 

> H

= [310 , 460], and T 4for ⊆ T 4 

> H

= [300 , 450]. This deliberate inclusion is a key coupling mechanism and innovation of the unified framework: Phase II transfers the coefficient dynamics identified in the Hankel space associated with T iH into physically reconstructed channel drivers on T i 

> for

⊆ T iH , and Phase III converts these drivers into a forecast of the quantity-of-interest. For each experiment, temporal agreement is quantified by the Pearson correlation coefficient R(for)  

> Q

. With the measured and forecasted power samples in the corresponding finite forecast window, this coefficient is 

R(for)  

> Q

=

> Nf

∑

> h=1

(

qNQ+h − q(for) 

> Q

) (̂ 

qNQ+h −̂ q(for) 

> Q

)[ Nf∑

> h=1

(

qNQ+h − q(for) 

> Q

)2

]1/2 [ Nf∑

> h=1

(̂ 

qNQ+h −̂ q(for) 

> Q

)2

]1/2 ,q(for)  

> Q

= 1

Nf

> Nf

∑

> h=1

qNQ+h,̂ q(for)  

> Q

= 1

Nf

> Nf

∑

> h=1

̂

qNQ+h.

(178) 77 The forecast relative error is denoted by e(for)  

> Q, rel

and is defined as 

e(for)  

> Q, rel

=

[ Nf∑

> h=1

(qNQ+h −̂ qNQ+h

)2

]1/2

[ Nf∑

> h=1

q2

> NQ+h

]1/2 . (179) The coefficient R(for)  

> Q

measures temporal-shape agreement, and e(for)  

> Q, rel

measures the relative amplitude discrepancy. Table 16 reports both quantities together with the identification-to-forecast ratio RQ/ for defined in Eq. (164).  

> Table 16 Phase III finite-horizon solar-plant power forecasting results for the four experiment-specific forecast horizons.

Reported quantity Symbol T 1for T 2for T 3for T 4for 

Finite forecast horizon T i 

> for

[288 , 335] [360 , 431] [310 , 409] [300 , 449] Forecasted samples Nf 48 72 100 150 Paired identification samples NQ 287 359 309 299 Identification-to-forecast ratio RQ/ for 5.9792 4.9861 3.0900 1.9933 Forecast correlation R(for)  

> Q

0.9975 0.9949 0.9933 0.9923 Forecast relative error e(for)  

> Q, rel

0.0863 0.0922 0.0987 0.1073 Phase III execution time – 3.7901 s 2.2284 s 2.1479 s 2.1292 s 

Finite-horizon forecasts of normalized solar-plant power over 48, 72, 100, and 150 hourly steps are presented in Figs. 11, 12, 13, and 14, respectively. All four experiments achieve a forecast correlation above 0 .99, with R(for)  

> Q

ranging from 0 .9923 to 0 .9975. Thus, the predicted power trajectories preserve the temporal shape of the validation data even for the 150-hour recursion. The relative error increases gradually from 0 .0863 for the 48-hour forecast to 0 .1073 for the 150-hour forecast, while RQ/ for decreases from 5 .9792 to 1 .9933. This trend is consistent with the more demanding combination of a longer recursive horizon and fewer identification samples per forecasted step; it does not, by itself, establish a causal dependence on the ratio. Overall, the results show that the selected scalar models can propagate the physically reconstructed Phase II channel information across all four finite forecast horizons while maintaining strong temporal agreement and moderate relative amplitude error. The numerical Phase III results complete the proposed sequence of decomposition, Hankel coefficient-space identification, physical-space inverse calibration, and finite-horizon forecasting. Phase I provides the selected Hankel–Koopman representation, Phase II supplies the physical experimental channels reconstructed from the simulated coefficient dynamics, and Phase III converts these channel inputs into forecasts of 78 Fig. 11 Phase III finite-horizon forecast of normalized solar-plant power over Nf = 48 hourly steps. a. The combined observation–forecast subset is T 1obs ∪ T 1for = [1 , 335] ⊆ T fin , and the finite observation horizon is T 1obs = [1 , 287]. The forecast-start line at k = 288 separates the observation data from the validation data and their recursively computed forecasts. b. Detailed representation over the finite forecast horizon T 1for = [288 , 335], including the validation data, numerical forecast, and 95% confidence interval. 

quantity of interest QI. This section consolidates the theoretical and numerical contri-butions of the complete three-phase data-twin modeling and forecasting methodology introduced in this paper. 79 Fig. 12 Phase III finite-horizon forecast of normalized solar-plant power over Nf = 72 hourly steps. a. The combined observation–forecast subset is T 2obs ∪ T 2for = [1 , 431] ⊆ T fin , and the finite observation horizon is T 2obs = [1 , 359]. The forecast-start line at k = 360 separates the observation data from the validation data and their recursively computed forecasts. b. Detailed representation over the finite forecast horizon T 2for = [360 , 431], including the validation data, numerical forecast, and 95% confidence interval. 

# 5 Conclusion 

This paper developed an end-to-end methodology for the decomposition, identification, reconstruction, and finite-horizon forecasting of coupled experimental data. Phase I constructs an energy-ranked Hankel–Koopman representation of the measured channels; Phase II identifies and simulates their nonlinear reduced dynamics in Hankel coefficient 80 Fig. 13 Phase III finite-horizon forecast of normalized solar-plant power over Nf = 100 hourly steps. a. The combined observation–forecast subset is T 3obs ∪ T 3for = [1 , 409] ⊆ T fin , and the finite observation horizon is T 3obs = [1 , 309]. The forecast-start line at k = 310 separates the observation data from the validation data and their recursively computed forecasts. b. Detailed representation over the finite forecast horizon T 3for = [310 , 409], including the validation data, numerical forecast, and 95% confidence interval. 

space and reconstructs the corresponding physical channels; and Phase III uses these reconstructed channels to drive the recursive forecast of a coupled quantity of interest. The mathematical analysis accompanies each computational phase. Theorem 1 establishes the finite-horizon Hankel–Koopman energy decomposition; Theorem 2 estab-lishes existence, uniqueness, and inverse stability for the coefficient-space NLARX model and its physical-space reconstruction; and Theorem 3 establishes the finite-horizon 81 Fig. 14 Phase III finite-horizon forecast of normalized solar-plant power over Nf = 150 hourly steps. a. The combined observation–forecast subset is T 4obs ∪ T 4for = [1 , 449] ⊆ T fin , and the finite observation horizon is T 4obs = [1 , 299]. The forecast-start line at k = 300 separates the observation data from the validation data and their recursively computed forecasts. b. Detailed representation over the finite forecast horizon T 4for = [300 , 449], including the validation data, numerical forecast, and 95% confidence interval. 

stability of the composed scalar-output forecast. Thus, the algorithmic constructions are connected to explicitly stated hypotheses and proven finite-horizon properties, while the numerical conclusions are supported by the reported experiments. The originality of the work lies in two new methodological components and their end-to-end coupling. First, the Hankel–Koopman finite-horizon energy decomposition (HKFED) constructs orthogonal energy directions and linked spectral–spatial–temporal 82 triplets, which are ranked according to finite-horizon energy and persistence. Pareto selection balances reconstruction accuracy, matrix similarity, and reduced dimension, while anti-diagonal recovery maps the selected representation to the physical measure-ment space. Second, the inverse-calibrated coupled multi-output NLARX methodology identifies and simulates the nonlinear dynamics in Hankel coefficient space, whereas its Tikhonov-based and Pareto-based selection procedures evaluate the reconstructed phys-ical channels. Phase III employs an established recursive NLARX forecasting structure, but introduces within the complete framework the transfer mechanism through which the physical channel trajectories reconstructed from the simulated Hankel coefficients become exogenous inputs to the quantity-of-interest forecast. The framework was evaluated using a solar-power-plant case study in which coupled meteorological measurements served as physical input channels and the generated solar power constituted the quantity of interest. For forecast horizons of 48, 72, 100, and 150 hours, the correlations range from 0 .9923 to 0 .9975, while the relative errors range from 0.0863 to 0 .1073. Correlations remain above 0 .99 as RQ/ for decreases from 5 .9792 to 1.9933. This behavior is consistent with the increasingly demanding combination of a longer recursive horizon and fewer identification samples per forecasted step, although it does not by itself establish a causal dependence on this ratio. The complete workflow maintains traceability from the experimental record to the selected Koopman-energy triplets, simulated reduced dynamics, reconstructed physical channels, NLARX regressors, model-selection objectives, and final forecast. Modal energies quantify the retained latent directions, Koopman-energy modes map the latent coordinates to physical measurements, nonlinear feature maps represent delayed interactions, and Pareto objectives document the model-selection process. Through problem-specific choices of normalization, Hankel depth, admissible model families, calibration and forecast windows, and quantity of interest, the methodology can be adapted to other coupled nonlinear processes involving finite predictive horizons. Future work will focus on extending the proposed framework to a broader range of nonlinear applications, particularly those involving two-dimensional spatial domains. 

# References 

[1] Koopman, B.O.: Hamiltonian systems and transformation in Hilbert space. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 

17 (5), 315–318 (1931) https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.17.5.315 [2] Koopman, B., Neumann, J.: Dynamical systems of continuous spectra. Proceed-ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 18 (3), 255–263 (1932) https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.18.3.255 [3] Koopman, B.: On distributions admitting a sufficient statistic. Transactions of the American Mathematical Society 39 (3), 399–400 (1936) https://doi.org/10. 2307/1989758 [4] Mezić, I., Banaszuk, A.: Comparison of systems with complex behavior. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenomena 197 (1), 101–133 (2004) https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 83 physd.2004.06.015 [5] Mezić, I.: Spectral properties of dynamical systems, model reduction and decom-positions. Nonlinear Dynamics 41 (1-3), 309–325 (2005) https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11071-005-2824-x [6] Mezić, I.: Koopman operator, geometry, and learning of dynamical systems. Notices of the American Mathematical Society 68 (7), 1087–1105 (2021) https: //doi.org/10.1090/noti2306 [7] Mezić, I.: On numerical approximations of the Koopman operator. Mathematics 

10 , 1180 (2022) https://doi.org/10.3390/math10071180 [8] Ruan, S., Class, A.G., Rozza, G.: A structured review of reduced order mod-eling for domain decomposition problems: State of the art and perspectives. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering (2026) https://doi.org/10. 1007/s11831-026-10690-9 [9] Tsai, P.-H., Ivagnes, A., Quaini, A., Iliescu, T., Rozza, G.: Stabop: A data-driven stabilization operator for reduced order modeling. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 457 , 118990 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma. 2026.118990 [10] Codega, G., Ivagnes, A., Demo, N., Rozza, G.: Machine learning-based quadratic closures for non-intrusive reduced order models. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 48 (3), 505–525 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1137/25M1766759 [11] Reyes, J., Tsai, P.H., Novo, J., Iliescu, T.: A priori error bounds and parameter scalings for the time-relaxation reduced order model. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 63 (5), 1933–1961 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1137/24M1708656 [12] Zappon, E., Manzoni, A., Gervasio, P., Quarteroni, A.: A reduced order model for domain decompositions with non-conforming interfaces. Journal of Scientific Computing 99 (1), 22 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915-024-02465-w [13] Iliescu, T.: ROM Closures and Stabilizations for Under-Resolved Turbulent Flows. In: 2022 Spring Central Sectional Meeting (2022). 

https://indico.math.cnrs.fr/event/5543/contributions/6201/attachments/3280/4393/iliescu-bordeaux-2022.pdf 

[14] Ahmed, S.E., San, O., Bistrian, D.A., Navon, I.M.: Sampling and resolution characteristics in reduced order models of shallow water equations: Intrusive vs nonintrusive. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Fluids 92 (8), 992–1036 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1002/fld.4815 [15] Noack, B.R., Morzynski, M., Tadmor, G.: Reduced-order modelling for flow control. (2013). https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:62072525 

84 [16] Tissot, G., Cordier, L., Benard, N., Noack, B.R.: Model reduction using dynamic mode decomposition. Comptes Rendus Mecanique 342 , 410–416 (2014) https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.crme.2013.12.011 [17] Gonnella, I.C., Khamlich, M., Pichi, F., Rozza, G.: A stochastic perturbation approach to nonlinear bifurcating problems. Journal of Scientific Computing 

108 (1), 20 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1007/s10915-026-03338-0 [18] Silva, V.L.S., Salinas, P., Heaney, C.E., Jackson, M.D., Pain, C.C.: Online learning to accelerate nonlinear pde solvers: Applied to multiphase porous media flow. Artificial Intelligence in Geosciences 6(2), 100146 (2025) https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.aiig.2025.100146 [19] Caforio, F., Regazzoni, F., Pagani, S., Karabelas, E., Augustin, C., Haase, G., Plank, G., Quarteroni, A.: Physics-informed neural network estimation of material properties in soft tissue nonlinear biomechanical models. Computational Mechanics 75 (2), 487–513 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00466-024-02516-x [20] Alla, A., Kutz, J.N.: Nonlinear model order reduction via dynamic mode decomposition. SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing 39 (5), 778–796 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1137/16M1059308 [21] Rowley, C.W., Mezić, I., Bagheri, S., Schlatter, P., Henningson, D.S.: Spectral analysis of nonlinear flows. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 641 , 115–127 (2009) https://doi.org/10.1017/S0022112009992059 [22] Schmid, P.J., Sesterhenn, J.: Dynamic Mode Decomposition of Numerical and Experimental Data. In: 61st Annual Meeting of the APS Division of Fluid Dynamics, vol. 53(15). San Antonio, Texas (2008). https://doi.org/2008APS. .DFD.MR007S [23] Schmid, P.J.: Dynamic mode decomposition of numerical and experimental data. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 656 , 5–28 (2010) https://doi.org/10.1017/ S0022112010001217 [24] Rowley, C.W., Mezić, I., Bagheri, S., Schlatter, P., Henningson, D.S.: Reduced-order Models for Flow Control: Balanced Models and Koopman Modes. In: Seventh IUTAM Symposium on Laminar-Turbulent Transition, IUTAM Bookseries, vol. 18, pp. 43–50 (2010) [25] Proctor, J.L., Brunton, S.L., Kutz, J.N.: Dynamic mode decomposition with control. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 15 (1), 142–161 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1137/15M1013857 [26] Colbrook, M.J., Herwig, A., Kutz, J.N.: Prone: Petrov–Galerkin operator learning unifies DMD, SINDy & Koopmanism. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.27982 (2026) https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2606.27982 85 [27] Lee, C.-H., Chen, J.-S.: Proper orthogonal decomposition-based model order reduction via radial basis functions for molecular dynamics systems. Int. J. Numer. Meth. Engng 96 (10), 599–627 (2013) https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.4552 [28] Cueto, E., Chinesta, F., Huerta, A.: Model order reduction based on proper orthogonal decomposition. In: Chinesta, F., Ladeveze, P. (eds.) Separated Rep-resentations and PGD-Based Model Reduction: Fundamentals and Applications, pp. 1–26. Springer, Vienna (2014) [29] Ivagnes, A., Stabile, G., Rozza, G.: Data-driven closure strategies for parametrized reduced-order models via deep operator networks. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 455 , 118900 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma. 2026.118900 [30] Hajisharifi, A., Halder, R., Girfoglio, M., Stabile, G., Rozza, G.: A deep-learning enhanced gappy proper orthogonal decomposition method for conjugate heat transfer problem. Computers & Fluids 315 , 107114 (2026) https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.compfluid.2026.107114 [31] Gregson, K.D., Young, N.J.: Finite representations of block Hankel operators and balanced realizations. In: Gohberg, I., Helton, J.W., Rodman, L. (eds.) Contributions to Operator Theory and Its Applications: Proceedings of the Conference on Operator Theory and Functional Analysis, Mesa, Arizona, June 11-14, 1987, pp. 441–480. Birkhauser Basel, Basel (1988) [32] Arbabi, H., Mezić, I.: Ergodic theory, dynamic mode decomposition, and com-putation of spectral properties of the Koopman operator. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 16 (4), 2096–2126 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1137/ 17M1125236 [33] Brunton, S.L., Brunton, B.W., Proctor, J.L., Kaiser, E., Kutz, J.N.: Chaos as an intermittently forced linear system. Nature Communications 8(1), 19 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-017-00030-8 [34] Quarteroni, A.: Artificial Intelligence: Unveiling the Truth Beyond the Myths. Springer, Cham (2025). https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-92973-1 [35] Ren, P., Nakata, R., Lacour, M., Naiman, I., Nakata, N., Song, J., Bi, Z., Malik, O.A., Morozov, D., Azencot, O., Erichson, N.B., Mahoney, M.W.: Learning earthquake ground motions via conditional generative modeling. Nature Com-munications 17 (1), 4021 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-026-70719-2 [36] Della Pia, A., Patsatzis, D.G., Rozza, G., Russo, L., Siettos, C.: Surrogate normal-forms for the numerical bifurcation and stability analysis of Navier-Stokes flows via machine learning. Communications in Nonlinear Science and Numerical Simulation 161 , 110137 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cnsns.2026.110137 86 [37] Tang, Y., Xu, W., Cao, J., Gao, W., Farrell, S., Erichson, B., Mahoney, M.W., Nonaka, A., Yao, Z.J.: A multimodal large language model for materials sci-ence. Nature Machine Intelligence 8(4), 588–601 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1038/ s42256-026-01214-y [38] Guo, D., Heaney, C.E., Pinheiro, N.C., Li, L., Chen, B., Pain, C.C.: Domain-agnostic AI-based surrogate models: Transient flow prediction with domain-size and geometry invariance. Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering 461 , 119258 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cma.2026.119258 [39] Gan, P., Li, J., Fang, F., Wu, X., Zhu, J., Wang, Z., Zhu, M., Zou, X.: Hymeshai: Deep learning enabled three-dimensional adaptive mesh generator for high-resolution atmospheric simulations. Journal of Computational Physics 554 ,114760 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2026.114760 [40] Veneziani, A., Quaini, A., Tezzele, M., San, O., Iliescu, T.: Digital twins in coro-nary artery disease: A mathematical roadmap. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.24910 (2026) https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2604.24910 [41] Es-haghi, M.S., Anitescu, C., Rabczuk, T.: Methods for enabling real-time analysis in digital twins: A literature review. Computers & Structures 297 ,107342 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compstruc.2024.107342 [42] Colbrook, M.J.: The multiverse of dynamic mode decomposition algorithms. In: Numerical Analysis Meets Machine Learning. Handbook of Numerical Analysis, vol. 25, pp. 127–230. Elsevier, Amsterdam (2024). https://doi.org/10.1016/bs. hna.2024.05.004 [43] Chen, K.K., Tu, J.H., Rowley, C.W.: Variants of dynamic mode decomposition: Boundary condition, Koopman, and Fourier analyses. Journal of Nonlinear Science 22 (6), 887–915 (2012) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00332-012-9130-9 [44] Askham, T., Kutz, J.N.: Variable projection methods for an optimized dynamic mode decomposition. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 17 (1), 380–416 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1137/M1124176 [45] Tu, J.H., Rowley, C.W., Luchtenburg, D.M., Brunton, S.L., Kutz, J.N.: On dynamic mode decomposition: Theory and applications. Journal of Compu-tational Dynamics 1(2), 391–421 (2014) https://doi.org/10.3934/jcd.2014.1. 391 [46] Brunton, S.L., Proctor, J.L., Tu, J.H., Kutz, J.N.: Compressed sensing and dynamic mode decomposition. Journal of Computational Dynamics 2(2), 165–191 (2016) https://doi.org/10.3934/jcd.2015002 [47] Erichson, N.B., Donovan, C.: Randomized low-rank dynamic mode decomposition for motion detection. Computer Vision and Image Understanding 146 , 40–50 87 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cviu.2016.02.005. [48] Bistrian, D.A., Navon, I.M.: Randomized dynamic mode decomposition for non-intrusive reduced order modelling. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 112 (1), 3–25 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.5499 [49] Erichson, N.B., Mathelin, L., Kutz, J.N., Brunton, S.L.: Randomized dynamic mode decomposition. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 18 (4), 1867–1891 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1137/18M1215013 [50] Kutz, J.N., Fu, X., Brunton, S.L.: Multiresolution dynamic mode decomposition. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 15 (2), 713–735 (2016) https: //doi.org/10.1137/15M1023543 [51] Williams, M.O., Kevrekidis, I.G., Rowley, C.W.: A data-driven approximation of the Koopman operator: extending dynamic mode decomposition. Nonlinear Science 25 , 1307–1346 (2015) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00332-015-9258-5 [52] Colbrook, M.J., Townsend, A.: Rigorous data-driven computation of spectral properties of Koopman operators for dynamical systems. Communications on Pure and Applied Mathematics 77 (1), 221–283 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1002/ cpa.22125 [53] Colbrook, M.J., Ayton, L.J., Szőke, M.: Residual dynamic mode decomposition: Robust and verified Koopmanism. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 955 , 21 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1017/jfm.2022.1052 [54] Baddoo, P.J., Herrmann, B., McKeon, B.J., Kutz, J.N., Brunton, S.L.: Physics-informed dynamic mode decomposition. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences 479 (2271), 20220576 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1098/rspa.2022.0576 [55] Colbrook, M.J.: The mpEDMD algorithm for data-driven computations of measure-preserving dynamical systems. SIAM Journal on Numerical Analysis 

61 (3), 1585–1608 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1137/22M1521407 [56] Bistrian, D.A.: Reduced order data-driven twin models for nonlinear PDEs by randomized Koopman orthogonal decomposition and explainable deep learning. Mathematics 13 (17), 2870 (2025) https://doi.org/10.3390/math13172870 [57] Ljung, L.: System Identification: Theory for the User, 2nd edn. Information and System Sciences Series. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ (1999). 

https://books.google.ro/books?id=nHFoQgAACAAJ 

[58] Nelles, O.: Nonlinear System Identification: From Classical Approaches to Neural Networks and Fuzzy Models. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg (2001). https://doi. org/10.1007/978-3-662-04323-3 88 [59] Billings, S.A.: Nonlinear System Identification: NARMAX Methods in the Time, Frequency, and Spatio-Temporal Domains. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester (2013). https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118535561 [60] Benner, P., Gugercin, S., Willcox, K.: A survey of projection-based model reduction methods for parametric dynamical systems. SIAM Review 57 (4), 483–531 (2015) https://doi.org/10.1137/130932715 [61] Takeishi, N., Kawahara, Y., Yairi, T.: Learning Koopman invariant subspaces for dynamic mode decomposition. In: Proceedings of the 31st Interna-tional Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems. NIPS’17, pp. 1130–1140. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA (2017). 

https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/3a835d3215755c435ef4fe9965a3f2a0-Abstract.html 

[62] Lusch, B., Kutz, J.N., Brunton, S.L.: Deep learning for universal linear embed-dings of nonlinear dynamics. Nature Communications 9(1), 4950 (2018) https: //doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-07210-0 [63] Otto, S.E., Rowley, C.W.: Linearly recurrent autoencoder networks for learning dynamics. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 18 (1), 558–593 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1137/18M1177846 [64] Azencot, O., Erichson, N.B., Lin, V., Mahoney, M.: Forecasting sequential data using consistent Koopman autoencoders. In: Daumé, H. III, Singh, A. (eds.) Proceedings of the 37th International Conference on Machine Learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, vol. 119, pp. 475–485. PMLR, Virtual Event (2020). https://proceedings.mlr.press/v119/azencot20a.html 

[65] Kapteyn, M.G., Knezevic, D.J., Willcox, K.E.: Toward predictive digital twins via component-based reduced-order models and interpretable machine learning. In: AIAA Scitech 2020 Forum, p. 0418. American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics, ??? (2020). https://doi.org/10.2514/6.2020-0418 [66] Kapteyn, M.G., Willcox, K.E.: Design of digital twin sensing strategies via predictive modeling and interpretable machine learning. Journal of Mechanical Design 144 (9), 091710 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1115/1.4054907 [67] Kapteyn, M.G., Pretorius, J.V.R., Willcox, K.E.: A probabilistic graphical model foundation for enabling predictive digital twins at scale. Nature Computational Science 1(5), 337–347 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1038/s43588-021-00069-0 [68] Kapteyn, M.G., Knezevic, D.J., Huynh, D.B.P., Tran, M., Willcox, K.E.: Data-driven physics-based digital twins via a library of component-based reduced-order models. International Journal for Numerical Methods in Engineering 123 (13), 2986–3003 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1002/nme.6423 . First published online 20 May 2020 89 [69] Bistrian, D.A.: High-fidelity digital twin data models by randomized dynamic mode decomposition and deep learning with applications in fluid dynamics. Modelling 3(3), 314–332 (2022) https://doi.org/10.3390/modelling3030020 [70] Holmes, P., Lumley, J., Berkooz, G.: Turbulence, Coherent Structures, Dynamical Systems and Symmetry. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1996). https: //doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511622700 [71] Hegazy, K., Mahoney, M.W., Erichson, N.B.: Recency biased causal attention for time-series forecasting. In: The 29th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics (2026). https://openreview.net/forum?id=BAimLZ9Wzx 

[72] Sousa, J., Henriques, R.: T2f: Actor-critic reinforcement learning for time-series forecasting. Neural Computing and Applications 38 (12), 510 (2026) https://doi. org/10.1007/s00521-026-12209-6 [73] Zito, F., Cutello, V., Pavone, M.: Data-driven forecasting and its role in enhanced decision-making. Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence 154 , 110934 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.engappai.2025.110934 [74] Beletskaya, N.V., Konanov, S.A., Petrusevich, D.A., Stoyanovskii, A.V.: Implementation of kriging in forecasting time series processes. Journal of Communications Technology and Electronics 70 (7), 319–326 (2025) https: //doi.org/10.1134/S106422692570041X [75] Eichholz, J., Knauer, T., Winkelmann, S.: Digital maturity of forecasting and its impact in times of crisis. Schmalenbach Journal of Business Research 75 (4), 443–481 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1007/s41471-023-00171-1 [76] Nápoles, G., Grau, I., Salgueiro, Y.: Fast and interpretable time series forecasting using long short-term cognitive networks. Evolving Systems 17 (3), 77 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1007/s12530-026-09839-5 [77] Zhou, J., Fang, F., Pain, C.C., Li, L., Zheng, J., Wang, Y., Navon, I.M., Zhu, J.: Duo-attnopnets: Advancing global operational forecasting for atmospheric carbon monoxide with ai-empowered 4d-var. Journal of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 18 (2), 2025–005319 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1029/2025MS005319 [78] Lyu, D., Nakata, R., Ren, P., Mahoney, M.W., Pitarka, A., Nakata, N., Erichson, N.B.: Rapid wavefield forecasting for earthquake early warning via deep sequence to sequence learning. Nature Communications 16 (1), 10622 (2025) https://doi. org/10.1038/s41467-025-65435-2 [79] Kong, X., Chen, Z., Liu, W., Ning, K., Zhang, L., Muhammad Marier, S., Liu, Y., Chen, Y., Xia, F.: Deep learning for time series forecasting: a survey. International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics 16 (7), 5079–5112 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1007/s13042-025-02560-w 90 [80] Mojtahedi, F.F., Yousefpour, N., Chow, S.H., Cassidy, M.: Deep learning for time series forecasting: Review and applications in geotechnics and geosciences. Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering 32 (6), 3415–3445 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831-025-10244-5 [81] Lasota, A., Mackey, M.C.: Probabilistic Properties of Deterministic Sys-tems. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1985). https://doi.org/10.1017/ CBO9780511897474 [82] Lasota, A., Mackey, M.: Chaos, Fractals, and Noise. Stochastic Aspects of Dynamics vol. 97. Springer, New York, NY (1994). https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-1-4612-4286-4 [83] Brunton, S.L., Brunton, B.W., Proctor, J.L., Kutz, J.N.: Koopman invariant subspaces and finite linear representations of nonlinear dynamical systems for control. PLoS ONE 11 (2), 0150171 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone. 0150171 [84] Budisić, M., Mohr, R., Mezić, I.: Applied koopmanism. Chaos 22 (4), 047510 (2012) https://doi.org/10.1063/1.4772195 [85] Susuki, Y., Sako, K., Hikihara, T.: On the Spectral Equivalence of Koopman Operators through Delay Embedding (2017). https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv. 1706.01006 [86] Das, S., Giannakis, D.: Delay-coordinate maps and the spectra of Koopman operators. Journal of Statistical Physics 175 (6), 1107–1145 (2019) https://doi. org/10.1007/s10955-019-02272-w [87] Kamb, M., Kaiser, E., Brunton, S.L., Kutz, J.N.: Time-delay observables for Koop-man: Theory and applications. SIAM Journal on Applied Dynamical Systems 

19 (2), 886–917 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1137/18M1216572 [88] Koltai, P., Kunde, P.: A Koopman–Takens theorem: Linear least squares predic-tion of nonlinear time series. Communications in Mathematical Physics 405 (5), 120 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00220-024-05004-8 [89] Colchero, C., Pérez-García, J.E., Herrera, A., Probst, O.: A multichannel gener-alization of the HAVOK method for the analysis of nonlinear dynamical systems. Chaos 36 (3), 033111 (2026) https://doi.org/10.1063/5.0303718 [90] Davies, E.B.: Spectral Theory and Differential Operators; Volume 42 in the Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics. Cambridge Studies in Advanced Mathematics, vol. 42. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1996). https: //doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511623721 91 [91] Gu, Y., Wei, H.-L.: Modelling short-term appliance energy use with inter-pretable machine learning: A system identification approach. Arabian Journal for Science and Engineering 48 (11), 15667–15678 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1007/ s13369-023-08084-1 [92] Zhao, Y., Liu, Z., Zhang, H., Han, Q., Liu, Y., Wang, X.: On-line condition monitoring for rotor systems based on nonlinear data-driven modelling and model frequency analysis. Nonlinear Dynamics 112 (7), 5229–5245 (2024) https: //doi.org/10.1007/s11071-024-09290-8 [93] Fatima, S.K., Abbas, S.M., Mir, I., Gul, F., Forestiero, A.: Flight dynamics modeling with multi-model estimation techniques: A consolidated framework. Journal of Electrical Engineering & Technology 18 (3), 2371–2381 (2023) https: //doi.org/10.1007/s42835-023-01376-4 [94] Balcha, Y.A., Kaveh, K., Alamirew, T., Malcherek, A.: Comparability of NARX model to SWAT model in simulating future water resources scenarios using CMIP6 climate model outputs over UASB, Ethiopia. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment 39 (5), 2095–2115 (2025) https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00477-025-02959-5 [95] Fentis, A., Bahatti, L., Tabaa, M., Mestari, M.: Short-term nonlinear autore-gressive photovoltaic power forecasting using statistical learning approaches and in-situ observations. International Journal of Energy and Environmental Engineering 10 (2), 189–206 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1007/s40095-018-0293-5 [96] Moursi, A.S., El-Fishawy, N., Djahel, S., Shouman, M.A.: An IoT enabled system for enhanced air quality monitoring and prediction on the edge. Com-plex & Intelligent Systems 7(6), 2923–2947 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1007/ s40747-021-00476-w [97] Lafuente-Cacho, M., Izquierdo-Monge, O., Pena-Carro, P., Hernandez-Jimenez, A., Callejo, L.H., Losada, A.M.P., Lamadrid, A.L.Z.: State of the art for solar and wind energy-forecasting methods for sustainable grid integration. Current Sustainable/Renewable Energy Reports 12 (1), 13 (2025) https://doi.org/10. 1007/s40518-025-00262-z [98] Cargan, T.R., Landa-Silva, D., Triguero, I.: Local-global methods for generalised solar irradiance forecasting. Applied Intelligence 54 (2), 2225–2247 (2024) https: //doi.org/10.1007/s10489-024-05273-9 [99] Salman, D., Direkoglu, C., Kusaf, M., Fahrioglu, M.: Hybrid deep learning models for time series forecasting of solar power. Neural Computing and Applications 

36 (16), 9095–9112 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-024-09558-5 [100] Çevik Bektaş, S., Altaş, I.H.: DWT-BILSTM-based models for day-ahead hourly global horizontal solar irradiance forecasting. Neural Computing and Applications 92 36 (21), 13243–13253 (2024) https://doi.org/10.1007/s00521-024-09701-2 [101] Open-Meteo: Historical Weather API. https://open-meteo.com/en/docs/ historical-weather-api (2026) 

# Declarations 

## Use of AI-Assisted Technologies 

During the preparation of this manuscript, the authors used ChatGPT (OpenAI) solely to assist with English-language drafting and editing based on author-provided scientific content, LaTeX table construction, consolidation of mathematical notation, and section-consistency checks. The scientific concepts, mathematical formulations and proofs, algorithms, computational procedures, data analysis, numerical results, and conclusions were developed and verified exclusively by the authors. The authors reviewed and approved all AI-assisted text and take full responsibility for the final content of the manuscript. 

## Author Contributions 

D.A.B. conceived the study, developed the methodology and mathematical analysis, wrote the original manuscript, reviewed and edited the manuscript, developed the software, and performed the validation. M.T. conducted the investigation, curated the data, contributed engineering expertise in solar photovoltaic systems, contributed to the software development, and performed the validation. Both authors reviewed and approved the final manuscript. 93