Title: Stellar Abundances as Probes of Rocky Exoplanet Interiors: The Mantle Composition and Mineralogy of GJ 486b

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.18457v1

Published Time: Thu, 20 Aug 2026 00:22:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 28

Markdown Content:
> Draft version August 20, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX631

Stellar Abundances as Probes of Rocky Exoplanet Interiors: The Mantle Composition and Mineralogy of GJ 486b 

Harshit Krishna ,1, 2, 3, ∗ Asmit Gupta ,1, 2, 4, ∗ Sneha Bhowmik ,1, 2, 5 Chandan K. Sahu ,1, 2, 6 

Sudipta Mridha ,1, 2 and Liton Majumdar 1, 2 

> 1Exoplanets and Planetary Formation Group, School of Earth and Planetary Sciences, National Institute of Science Education and Research, Jatni 752050, Odisha, India
> 2Homi Bhabha National Institute, Training School Complex, Anushaktinagar, Mumbai 400094, India
> 3Department of Physical Sciences, Indian Institute of Science Education and Research (IISER) Mohali, Knowledge City, Sector 81, Sahibzada Ajit Singh Nagar, Punjab 140306, India
> 4Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Kolkata, Mohanpur 741246, West Bengal, India
> 5Department of Geology and Geophysics, Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur 721302, India
> 6Department of Geosciences, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, State College, 16802, Pennsylvania, USA

ABSTRACT Over the past three decades, hundreds of rocky exoplanets have been discovered. Some of these show atmospheric signatures indicative of diverse chemical compositions. Interpreting these atmo-spheres requires a physically grounded understanding of planetary interiors, as interior composition and mineralogy govern the formation and evolution of secondary atmospheres. Rocky terrestrial exo-planets are expected to inherit the refractory composition of their host stars, providing a direct pathway to constrain their bulk composition and mineralogy. However, a large fraction of these planets orbit M-type stars, whose compositions remain poorly constrained because of limited and uncertain stellar abundance measurements. Here, we present a physically consistent framework that connects stellar abundances to the interior structure and mineralogy of rocky exoplanets by combining stellar abun-dance inference, devolatilization modeling to estimate bulk and mantle elemental abundances, interior structure calculations to derive pressure–temperature profiles, and thermodynamic equilibrium mod-eling of mantle mineralogy. We first benchmark the framework against Earth and then apply it to the super-Earth GJ 486b using chemically consistent abundances derived from ensembles of similar M-dwarf hosts. We find that GJ 486b likely hosts an iron-rich and silica-poor mantle relative to Earth while preserving the major mantle phase transitions. Sensitivity analyses show that the overall miner-alogical structure is robust to variations in bulk composition and pressure–temperature profiles, with temperature primarily modulating phase proportions near key transitions. Our results demonstrate that stellar chemical abundances, when combined with physically motivated devolatilization models, provide robust constraints on planetary interior composition and mineralogy beyond those obtain-able from mass and radius measurements alone. This framework establishes a physically motivated foundation for linking rocky exoplanet interiors to atmospheric characterization in the JWST era. 

Keywords: Exoplanets (498); Super Earths (1655); Planetary interior (1248); Extrasolar rocky planets (511) 

1. INTRODUCTION  

> Corresponding author: Liton Majumdar liton@niser.ac.in, dr.liton.majumdar@gmail.com
> ∗These authors contributed equally to this work.

More than 6,000 exoplanets have been discovered to date, and this number is expected to grow substantially over the next decade with continued advances in ob-servational capabilities. Over the past two decades, space-based transit surveys and precision radial-velocity programs have yielded large samples of planets with well-determined masses, radii, and orbital properties (Borucki et al. 2010; Batalha et al. 2011; Ricker et al. arXiv:2608.18457v1 [astro-ph.EP] 19 Aug 2026 22015). These surveys have revealed that small plan-ets, particularly Earth-sized and super-Earth planets, are common in the Galaxy. With the advent of the 

James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), transmission and emission spectroscopy of small exoplanets is becoming feasible, providing the first observational constraints on the atmospheric composition of rocky worlds that pos-sess atmospheres (Espinoza & Perrin 2025). In parallel, mid-infrared instruments on next-generation extremely large telescopes (ELTs) will enable direct imaging and atmospheric characterization of nearby terrestrial plan-ets. Together, these observational advances are shifting the field from the detection and bulk characterization of exoplanets toward probing their atmospheric compo-sition, climate processes, and potential surface environ-ments (Greene et al. 2016; Quanz et al. 2015). Interpreting these atmospheric measurements, how-ever, requires a deeper understanding of the interior structure and geophysical evolution of rocky planets. Terrestrial planets play a central role in studies of plane-tary formation and evolution because their solid surfaces and silicate-metal interiors can sustain long-lived sur-face water, active geochemical cycling, and climate feed-back (see Baumeister et al. (2025) for a review). During planetary accretion and early evolution, global magma oceans regulate the storage and release of volatiles, while subsequent volcanism continues to exchange gases be-tween the mantle and the atmosphere. The efficiency and chemical speciation of outgassing depend on sev-eral factors, including mantle composition, potential temperature, melt production, redox state, and the rate of volcanic activity (Lichtenberg & Miguel 2024). Among these, the mineralogical composition of the man-tle is particularly important because it governs plane-tary structure, thermodynamic properties, and volatile inventories, which together influence the composition and evolution of the atmosphere. Therefore, constrain-ing the interior properties of rocky planets is essential for linking atmospheric observations to the underlying geological evolution of these worlds (Kite et al. 2016; Van Hoolst et al. 2019; Nettelmann & Valencia 2021; Lichtenberg et al. 2025). However, constraining the interior properties of rocky planets remains challenging because these quantities cannot be measured directly. Although the masses and radii of many exoplanets are now measured with high precision, their interior structures remain highly de-generate, as different combinations of core size, man-tle composition, and layer thicknesses can reproduce the same bulk properties (Rogers & Seager 2010; Dorn et al. 2015). One promising avenue for breaking this degener-acy is to use the chemical composition of host stars as an additional constraint on the bulk composition of their planets (Sotin et al. 2007; Dorn et al. 2017; Unterborn & Panero 2019). To first order, the bulk composition of a planet is ex-pected to reflect that of its host star, since both form from the same protoplanetary disk (Wang et al. 2019a; Liu et al. 2020; Wang et al. 2022). Consequently, stel-lar abundance measurements provide an important con-straint on the expected mineralogy and interior struc-ture of exoplanets. In particular, refractory and mod-erately refractory elements trace the building blocks of rocky planets, such that stellar abundances of elements including Mg, Si, Fe, Al, Ca, Ni, Ti, Mn, Co, Na, and K provide physically motivated constraints on planetary bulk composition. Because stars and their planets orig-inate from the same protoplanetary material, refractory element ratios are expected to be broadly preserved dur-ing condensation, with only modest fractionation arising from disk chemistry, migration, and planetary differen-tiation. Lodders (2003) showed that solar photospheric and CI chondrite abundances agree to within 10% for 31 of 56 elements and within 15% for 41 of 56 elements. Furthermore, Wang et al. (2019b) found that reliable in-ferences of rocky-planet compositions from stellar refrac-tory abundances require abundance uncertainties below approximately 0.04 dex, corresponding to about 10– 15%. These stellar elemental ratios therefore map onto planetary bulk mantle compositions and can constrain mantle mineralogy, such as the relative proportions of olivine, pyroxene, garnet, and oxide phases, thereby in-forming interior structure and melting behavior, which in turn affects the oxidation state of the mantle (Gui-mond et al. 2023; Mojzsis 2022; Unterborn & Panero 2017; Spaargaren et al. 2023). Through their influ-ence on melt composition and volatile solubility, these mineralogical constraints also affect volcanic outgassing (Hirschmann et al. 2012; Wordsworth et al. 2018; Or-tenzi et al. 2020; Brugman et al. 2021). M-dwarf stars are particularly important in this con-text because a large fraction of the rocky planets discov-ered to date orbit such low-mass stars. Their small sizes, low luminosities, and the short orbital periods of their planets produce deep transits and large radial-velocity signals, thereby enabling detailed observational charac-terization of rocky worlds. Moreover, M dwarfs dom-inate the local stellar population, comprising roughly 70% of stars in the Milky Way and the solar neigh-borhood according to volume-limited surveys and field luminosity functions (Henry & Jao 2024). For these stars, the Gaia Data Release 3 (DR3) catalog provides high-precision astrometry, broadband photometry, and homogeneous astrophysical parameters for hundreds of 3Obtain stellar elemental abundances from Gaia DR3 Get the planetary properties for interior structure Select the stellar abundance model Obtain the mantle density and adiabatic P-T profile via SERPINT Calculate Gibbs free energy for each mineral phase at given P-T using HeFESTo Apply null-space transformation for dimensionality reduction Optimize phase proportions for minimum Gibbs free energy Output: Stable phase assemblage Calculate the planetary bulk elemental composition via ExoInt Stellar data Stellar model Devolatilization Planetary properties Interior structure Mineralogy calculation        

> Figure 1. Flowchart of our planetary interior mineralogy framework combining ExoInt (Wang et al. 2019a), SERPINT (Sahu et al. 2025), and HeFESTo (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2005, 2011, 2024). This three-stage approach integrates stellar and planetary abundances (left), interior structure (right), and mineralogical calculations (center) to derive the stable phase assemblage of a rocky planet mantle.

millions of stars within the solar neighborhood ( ∼ 150 pc). The catalog includes derived stellar properties such as effective temperature, luminosity, radius, and mass and, for a significant subset, also provides esti-mates of bulk metallicity and individual elemental abun-dances obtained through spectrophotometric modeling (Vallenari et al. 2023; Behmard et al. 2025). Motivated by these recent observational advances, our goal is to develop a physically consistent framework that connects host-star abundances to the interior structure and mineralogy of rocky exoplanets. To achieve this, we combine stellar abundance inference, devolatilization modeling, interior structure calculations, and thermody-namic equilibrium mineralogy. Specifically, we use stel-lar abundance data from the Gaia DR3 catalog (Val-lenari et al. 2023; Behmard et al. 2025) and the Hy-patia Catalog (Hinkel et al. 2014) to estimate the bulk and mantle elemental abundances of rocky exoplanets using the devolatilization model ExoInt (Wang et al. 2019a,b). We then compute the pressure–temperature (P –T ) profile using the rocky planet interior structure and evolution model SERPINT (Sahu et al. 2025). Fi-nally, we combine these results with HeFESTo (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2005, 2011, 2024), a Gibbs free-energy minimization framework for calculating thermo-dynamic equilibrium in multi-component mineral sys-tems, to predict the mantle mineralogy as a function of planetary depth. We apply this integrated ExoInt –SERPINT –HeFESTo 

framework (hereafter the ESH framework) to GJ 486b, a potentially rocky planet with a mass of 3 .00 M⊕ and a radius of 1 .343 R⊕, orbiting the M3.5V star GJ 486, which has a radius of 0 .339 R⊙ and an effective tempera-ture of 3317 K (Caballero et al. 2022). Using this frame-work, we derive plausible mantle mineralogy profiles as a function of planetary depth and perform sensitivity analyses to assess the robustness of the predicted min-eralogy to uncertainties in both bulk composition and pressure–temperature structure. Estimating the mantle mineralogy of rocky exoplan-ets directly from host-star abundances presents several methodological challenges, two of which are addressed in this work. First, precise elemental abundance mea-surements for M-dwarf stars remain difficult to obtain, and even modest observational uncertainties can propa-gate into significant uncertainties in the inferred mantle oxide composition and resulting mineralogy. To address this challenge, we develop a robust statistical framework for inferring stellar elemental abundances and quanti-fying how these uncertainties propagate into the bulk and mantle compositions of their orbiting rocky plan-ets. Second, we perform a comprehensive sensitivity analysis to assess the robustness of the predicted man-tle mineralogy to uncertainties in both bulk composi-tion and pressure–temperature structure. Collectively, these developments provide a practical and physically consistent framework for estimating the mantle miner-alogy of rocky exoplanets from fundamental stellar and planetary properties, establishing a foundation for con-necting host-star abundances to planetary interiors and, 4ultimately, to their atmospheric characterization in the JWST era. The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section 2, we describe the methodology used to infer mantle min-eralogy from stellar abundance data. Section 3 presents the principal results and sensitivity analyses. In Sec-tion 4, we discuss the implications and limitations of the framework. Finally, Section 5 summarizes the main conclusions of this work.  

> 2.

METHODS We present a computational framework that uses stellar chemical abundances to predict the mineralogy of rocky exoplanet mantles. The model proceeds in three main stages: (1) calculating the planetary ele-mental composition from bulk stellar abundances, (2) constructing the interior structure of the target planet, and (3) determining the mantle mineralogy under equi-librium conditions. Figure 1 provides an overview of the computational framework. We describe each stage in detail in the subsections below. 2.1. Stellar Abundance Data 

In this work, stellar chemical abundances are used to define the bulk composition of rocky exoplanets. We fo-cus primarily on refractory elements with high 50% con-densation temperatures ( T 50  

> c

≳ 1300 K; Lodders 2003), along with a few moderately volatile elements. In to-tal, we consider Mg, Si, Fe, Ca, Al, Na, Cr, O, C, N, Ni, and Ti, which together dominate the mass budget of ter-restrial mantles and cores (Bond et al. 2010; Thiabaud et al. 2015; Unterborn et al. 2016). All twelve elements are included in the stellar abundance model described in Section 2.2. Of these, only Mg, Si, Fe, Ca, Al, Na, Cr, and O are subsequently passed to HeFESTo to com-pute the mantle oxide composition. Mantle minerals bearing the remaining four elements (Ni, Ti, N, and C) are not included in the HeFESTo database (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2024). Elemental abundance ratios such as Mg/Si and Fe/Mg are computed from these data and serve as key inputs for constraining mantle mineral-ogy, phase proportions, and core-mantle differentiation (Sotin et al. 2007; Unterborn et al. 2016; Unterborn & Panero 2019; Dorn et al. 2017; Guimond et al. 2023, 2024; Spaargaren et al. 2023; Putirka & Rarick 2019). These ratios are propagated through the interior and the mineralogical models described in subsequent sections. We adopt stellar abundance measurements from the data-driven analysis of M dwarfs presented by Behmard et al. (2025) alongside compiled literature catalogs from Hinkel et al. (2014), which provides detailed elemental abundances for approximately 17 , 000 stars observed as part of the Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS-V). This dataset combines high-resolution near-infrared spec-troscopy with Gaia DR3 stellar parameters and a data-driven spectral modeling framework, enabling abun-dance determinations across a wide range of effective temperatures and metallicities. From this catalog, we extract logarithmic elemen-tal abundances relative to solar values (e.g., [Fe/H], [Mg/H], [Si/H], along with other refractory and mod-erately volatile elements where available). We restrict our sample to stars with reliable effective temperatures and metallicities. To account for missing values and heterogeneous un-certainties across elements, we employ a set of com-plementary abundance prediction models to estimate incomplete measurements in a statistically consistent manner. The final set of stellar abundances is used to compute elemental ratios and define bulk refractory compositions, which are then used as inputs for the planetary interior structure and equilibrium mineralogy calculations. 2.2. Stellar Abundance Models 

Elemental abundance measurements for M-dwarf stars are often incomplete, with many elements either un-measured or subject to large uncertainties. To ob-tain a chemically consistent set of stellar abundances suitable for planetary interior modeling, we employ a suite of complementary statistical models to estimate missing elemental abundances: (i) a multivariate nor-mal (Gaussian) model conditioned on stellar parame-ters (MvNP), (ii) a multivariate conditional abundance model (MvNA), and (iii) a condensation-temperature-based regression model ( Tc regression). All models are applied directly to the M-dwarf abundance dataset de-scribed in Section 2.1. For the multivariate normal (MvN) models (i.e., both MvNP and MvNA), which rely on empirical abundance correlations, we define a “local neighbor” sample for each target star by selecting stars within |∆Teff | ≤ 100 K and |∆[Fe /H] | ≤ 0.05 dex. This criterion ensures that abundance correlations are estimated from stars occupy-ing a similar region of stellar parameter space. Figure 2 shows the distribution of residuals for all stars included in these models. 2.2.1. Conditioned Multivariate Normal Models (MvNP and MvNA) 

Elemental abundances in stars are correlated due to common nucleosynthetic origins and chemical evolution, and they vary systematically with stellar metallicity and effective temperature. The MvNP model exploits these 50.4  

> 0.2
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 1.5 1.0

Observed [X/H] (dex)     

> 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> 0.2
> 0.1 0.0
> 0.1
> 0.2 0.3
> 1.5 1.0

Observed [X/H] (dex)      

> 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> 0.75
> 0.50 0.25
> 0.00
> 0.25 0.50 0.75 1.5 1.0

Observed [X/H] (dex)    

> 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> Residual (dex)
> Residual (dex)
> Residual (dex)
> MAE: 6.58%
> RMSE: 0.042 dex
> Bias: 0.003 dex
> MAE: 2.74%
> RMSE: 0.017 dex
> Bias: 0.000 dex
> MAE: 11.18%
> RMSE: 0.065 dex
> Bias: 0.002 dex

MvNP (Parameter Conditioned)  MvNA (Abundance Conditioned)  T Regression c

Figure 2. Residual (MAE: mean absolute error) distributions for the stellar abundance prediction models. Residuals are defined as ∆[X /H] = [X /H] pred − [X /H] obs . The dashed horizontal line marks zero residual. The MvNP and MvNA models show the tightest residual distributions and the lowest scatter. The tight and unbiased residual distribution of the MvNA model indicates that element–element correlations provide stronger predictive power than parameter-based trends alone, while the Tc

regression shows larger dispersion and systematic errors. C N O Na Cr Si Fe Mg Ni Ti Al Ca 0.3 

0.2 

0.1 

0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 

> [X/H] (dex)

Star - GJ 486 

Teff = 3317 K 

> Observed MVNP(Parameter) MVNA(Abundance) Tc Regression
> CNONa Cr Si Fe Mg Ni Ti Al Ca

0.00 0.05 0.10 

> Residual (dex)  MAE: 0.087

MVN (Parameter) Residuals CNONa Cr Si Fe Mg Ni Ti Al Ca 0.1 

0.0 0.1 

> Residual (dex)  MAE: 0.122

MVN (Abundance) Residuals 

Figure 3. Predicted elemental abundances for the M-dwarf GJ 486 ( Teff = 3317 K) compared with observed values. The top panel shows logarithmic abundances [X /H] predicted by three models: a parameter-conditioned multivariate normal model (MvNP; blue circles), an abundance-conditioned multivariate normal model (MvNA; magenta squares), and a condensation-temperature regression model (orange triangles). Observed abundances are shown as black circles where available. The bottom panels show the residuals (predicted minus observed abundances) for the MvNP (left) and MvNA (right) models, with the dashed red line indicating zero residual. Mean absolute errors (MAE), computed over elements with available observations, are indicated in each panel. All abundances are reported relative to solar values in logarithmic (dex) units. 

correlations by modeling the joint distribution of abun-dances and stellar parameters. We distinguish between two implementations of the multivariate normal framework based on the informa-6tion used for conditioning. In the parameter-conditioned model (MvNP), elemental abundances are predicted using only the observed stellar parameters, θ =([Fe /H] , T eff ), and the empirical abundance-parameter correlations inferred from the local neighbor sample. This approach is applicable when only stellar parame-ters are available or when abundance measurements are incomplete for the target star. It provides a baseline pre-diction driven by global chemical trends in the dataset. In contrast, the abundance-conditioned model (MvNA) conditions the multivariate distribution on a subset of observed elemental abundances for the tar-get star, rather than on stellar parameters alone. By exploiting intrinsic element–element correlations aris-ing from common nucleosynthetic origins and Galactic chemical evolution, MvNA leverages partial abundance information (e.g., Fe, Mg, or Si) to predict the remaining elements. As a result, MvNA typically yields improved accuracy when even a small number of elemental abun-dances are available, while MvNP remains essential for stars with only basic stellar parameters. Let X = (X1, . . . , X p) denote the vector of loga-rithmic elemental abundances relative to solar, where 

Xj ≡ [x j /H], and let θ = ([Fe /H] , T eff ) denote the ob-served stellar parameters. We assume that abundances and stellar parameters follow a joint multivariate nor-mal distribution. Logarithmic abundance ratios in stel-lar populations are often approximately Gaussian dis-tributed after normalization to solar values (Casey et al. 2019; Ness et al. 2015). 

X

θ

!

∼ N μX

μθ

!

, ΣXX ΣXθ 

ΣθX Σθθ 

!! 

,

where μX and μθ are the mean abundances and mean stellar parameters, respectively, estimated from the lo-cal neighbor sample. The covariance blocks Σ XX , Σ θθ ,ΣθX , and Σ Xθ encode element–element correlations, pa-rameter dispersion, and abundance–parameter correla-tions. For a target star with observed parameters θ⋆, the conditional mean abundance vector is 

E[X | θ = θ⋆] = μX + Σ Xθ Σ−1 

> θθ

(θ⋆ − μθ ),

which shifts the local mean abundance pattern according to the deviation of the target star’s parameters from the mean of the neighbor sample. 2.2.2. Condensation temperature regression 

The condensation temperature ( Tc) model provides a physically motivated ordering of stellar elements accord-ing to their volatility during disk cooling, separating volatile species from refractory solids. Trends with con-densation temperature have been proposed as potential signatures of dust and gas fractionation or planet forma-tion processes. Accordingly, trends with Tc are expected to emerge. The Tc regression model therefore serves as a simple and interpretable baseline for testing whether elemental abundances follow condensation-temperature-driven behavior. For each element, we fit a linear relation [X /H] = a + b T c + c [Fe /H] ,

where Tc is the 50% condensation temperature in a solar-composition gas (Lodders 2003). The coefficient b cap-tures any systematic dependence on condensation tem-perature, while c accounts for overall metallicity scaling. The model coefficients are estimated independently for each element using ordinary least squares applied to all stars with available measurements. 2.2.3. Model Selection 

Across the population, the MvNA model achieves the lowest mean absolute error (MAE) for most elements (see Figure 2), particularly for refractory species (e.g., Si, Fe, Mg, Ca, and Ti). This suggests that abundance correlations remain useful for predicting planetary com-position when only a subset of elemental abundances is available. Typical errors for MvNA are ∼0.02–0.05 dex, with minimal bias. The MvNP model performs con-sistently across all elements, with moderate MAEs of 

∼0.05–0.10 dex, reflecting its reliance on smooth abun-dance trends with Teff and [Fe/H], and yielding errors comparable to those of the MvNA model. In contrast, the Tc regression model shows substan-tially larger errors, particularly for iron and other refrac-tory elements, indicating that condensation temperature alone cannot accurately capture the detailed chemical structure of M-dwarf abundances (as shown in Figure 2). Figure 3 shows an example prediction for the M-dwarf GJ 486. For this individual case, the parameter-conditioned model (MvNP) produces a slightly lower MAE than the abundance-conditioned model (MvNA). This partly arises because [Fe/H] is explicitly used as an input parameter in MvNP, effectively constraining the predicted Fe abundance and reducing its contribution to the average error. In contrast, MvNA treats Fe as a com-ponent of the abundance vector within the multivariate correlation structure, allowing the predicted value to de-viate from the observed abundance. Specifically, in this application of MvNA, [Si/H] is predicted by condition-ing on the observed [Mg/H] and [Fe/H], [Mg/H] by con-ditioning on the observed [Si/H] and [Fe/H], and [Fe/H] 7by conditioning on the observed [Si/H] and [Mg/H]. The resulting non-zero residuals therefore reflect the de-gree to which the specific elemental abundance ratios of GJ 486 (e.g., Si/Mg) deviate from the conditional mean inferred from chemically similar M-dwarfs with compa-rable Teff and [Fe/H]. The MvNA model nevertheless produces the most compact and symmetric residual distribution, while the MvNP model remains largely unbiased but shows a broader dispersion. This behavior reflects the different information used by the two models: MvNP relies pri-marily on global abundance trends with stellar param-eters ( Teff and [Fe/H]), whereas MvNA additionally ex-ploits intrinsic element–element correlations present in the stellar abundance distribution of the training sam-ple. The local neighbor sample used to estimate these correlations is defined in stellar parameter space using Gaia DR3 values of Teff and [Fe/H]. Rather than selecting a single preferred model for sys-tems with incomplete abundance measurements, both approaches can be used to explore the range of plausible stellar compositions. In such cases, MvNP and MvNA together provide complementary estimates that span the plausible chemical regimes of the host star and, conse-quently, the range of mantle compositions that may arise in the corresponding rocky exoplanets. The Tc regression model displays both increased scat-ter and systematic residual trends, underscoring its role as a physically interpretable baseline rather than a high-accuracy predictor. For this reason, we do not use the 

Tc regression model for mineralogy calculations in this study. 2.3. Inferring Planetary Bulk Composition 

Stellar elemental abundances represent the initial chemical reservoir of a protoplanetary disk, but they cannot be used directly as a proxy for planetary com-positions. During disk evolution, elements condense at different temperatures, and solid material forming at dif-ferent locations undergoes varying degrees of thermal processing. This leads to systematic chemical fraction-ation before planet assembly, causing rocky planets to accrete material that differs in composition from their host stars (Bond et al. 2010; Thiabaud et al. 2015; Wang et al. 2019a). A primary driver of this fractionation is devolatilization, in which elements with lower conden-sation temperatures are progressively depleted relative to refractory elements. This process is controlled by the disk temperature structure and formation location, rather than by the later stages of planet growth (Lodders 2003; Wang et al. 2019b; Suer et al. 2023). Devolatiliza-tion therefore sets the bulk chemical makeup of rocky planets. We model this transformation using the open source code ExoInt (Wang et al. 2019b, 2022), which ap-plies volatility-dependent depletion and subsequently accounts for metal-silicate differentiation. The model quantifies elemental depletion as a function of the 50% condensation temperature and is calibrated using the compositional differences between the proto-Sun and the Earth. It thus yields both a devolatilized bulk planetary composition and a corresponding bulk mantle composi-tion. In this model, the partitioning of iron between the silicate mantle and the metallic core is determined through an oxygen mass-balance calculation, which pro-vides a first-order estimate of metal-silicate differentia-tion (Wang et al. 2019b, 2022). In ExoInt , oxygen is first allocated to the major lithophile elements accord-ing to their stoichiometric requirements to form silicate and oxide phases. The remaining oxygen budget then determines the fraction of iron that is oxidized to FeO in the mantle. Any iron that cannot be oxidized is assigned to the metallic reservoir and contributes to the core. In this framework, the core mass fraction emerges natu-rally from elemental stoichiometry and oxygen availabil-ity, rather than being prescribed a priori. We note that this approach does not explicitly account for processes such as planetary migration, giant impacts, volatile de-livery, disequilibrium accretion, or redox evolution dur-ing core formation, all of which can influence the Fe/FeO partitioning and the resulting core mass fraction. Con-sequently, the inferred core mass fraction should be in-terpreted as a first-order, model-derived estimate rather than a unique prediction of the planet’s differentiation history. These derived mantle-core compositions pro-vide physically consistent inputs for interior and miner-alogical modeling. Elemental ratios such as Fe/Mg and Mg/Si emerge naturally from the devolatilized compo-sition. The Fe/Mg ratio is determined by the resulting partitioning of iron between the core and mantle, while the Mg/Si ratio controls the dominant silicate mineral-ogy. The latest publicly available version of ExoInt does not include chromium in its devolatilization pipeline by default, as Cr 2O3 is a relatively low-abundance oxide compared to the major mantle components. As Cr is nearest to Fe and Si in terms of 50% condensation tem-perature ( Tc,50 ), to incorporate Cr, we extrapolated its devolatilization coefficients from those of Si and Fe, fol-lowing the same methodology on which ExoInt is built (Wang et al. 2022). We find that omitting Cr 2O3 from the bulk mantle composition alters the oxide stoichiom-80.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

Fe 

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Mg
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Si

(A) Star to Planet Bulk Composition 

> Star Sun GJ 486 (Star) Planet Earth (Bulk) GJ 486b (Bulk)
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0

Fe 

> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Mg
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Si

(B) Planet Bulk to Mantle Composition      

> Bulk Earth (Bulk) GJ 486b (Bulk) Mantle Earth (Mantle) GJ 486b (Mantle)
> Figure 4. Modeled Fe-Mg-Si molar abundances for the stellar and planetary sample. The left panel contrasts host star metallicity with the modeled bulk composition of orbiting planets, illustrating the correlation between stellar photospheric abundances and planetary bulk refractory ratios. The right panel demonstrates the compositional shift driven by differentiation by comparing initial planetary bulk compositions with their resulting silicate mantles, where iron is sequestered into the core. The Sun-Earth and GJ 486 systems are highlighted as Solar System and exoplanetary reference baselines. Data are derived from the Gaia DR3 catalog.

etry sufficiently to stabilize free metallic iron in the 

HeFESTo Gibbs-energy minimization. This arises from the more reduced bulk metal-to-oxygen ratio resulting from the removal of the trivalent cation Cr 3+ . A simi-lar effect on Fe-metal stability can arise from variations in the abundance of the trivalent oxide Fe 2O3 (Dong et al. 2026). However, systematically exploring varia-tions in Cr 3+ and Fe 3+ concentrations and their effects on Fe-metal stability is beyond the scope of this study. While incorporating Cr 2O3 prevents the formation of a free metallic iron phase for the specific bulk composi-tion considered here, we note that free Fe-metal may also occur in physically plausible mantle mineralogies under sufficiently reducing conditions. Figure 4 shows the Fe–Mg–Si ternary diagram com-paring stellar, planetary bulk, and planetary mantle compositions for systems within the Gaia DR3 catalog. Figure 4A compares stellar compositions with the bulk compositions of their planets, while Figure 4B compares planetary bulk compositions with the corresponding av-erage mantle compositions. 2.4. Setting-up the Interior Structure 

We use a time snapshot of the P –T profile of a solidi-fied planet obtained from the SERPINT code (Sahu et al. 2025). SERPINT is a one-dimensional, self-consistent model of rocky planet structure and thermal evolution. Given a planet’s physical and thermodynamic proper-ties, it solves the coupled equations of hydrostatic equi-librium, mass conservation, and energy transport to de-termine the interior structure, core size, and thermal evolution from the magma ocean stage to a fully solidi-fied state. We obtain the planet’s internal structure, density pro-file as a function of its depth, and the corresponding pressure-temperature (P-T) profile at the end of the 

SERPINT model run. This adiabatic P –T profile is repre-sentative of the bulk mantle and increases linearly with depth, as described in Equation 12 of Sahu et al. (2025) and Figure 6. This is then used as input to HeFESTo 

to compute the depth-dependent mineral phase assem-blages. However, SERPINT assumes an Earth-like bulk com-position when computing the interior structure. This assumption may not always hold for rocky planets orbit-ing different types of host stars. Previous studies, such as Seager et al. (2007); Unterborn et al. (2016) show that variation in a planet’s bulk composition can lead to changes in its interior structure and, consequently, its density and pressure profiles. Nevertheless, the re-9sulting pressure-temperature (P-T) structure has been shown to be relatively insensitive to moderate variations in bulk composition and interior structure (Unterborn & Panero 2019; Baumeister et al. 2025). This justifies the use of the computed adiabatic P -T profile in this work. 2.5. Deducing the Mantle Mineralogy using HeFESTo 

To compute the stable mineralogical assemblage of the mantle under prescribed P –T conditions, we employ 

HeFESTo (Helmholtz Free Energy Self-consistent Ther-modynamics), a Gibbs free energy minimization frame-work developed to model the thermodynamic equilib-rium of multicomponent mineral systems (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2005, 2011, 2024). The algorithm de-termines the equilibrium phase assemblage by minimiz-ing the total Gibbs free energy of the system, subject to constraints imposed by bulk composition, pressure, and temperature. At each point along the planetary inte-rior P –T profile, HeFESTo evaluates all permissible phase combinations and identifies the assemblage that satis-fies thermodynamic equilibrium while conserving mass (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011). The theoretical basis of this approach follows classical equilibrium thermodynamics, in which the stable state of a system at fixed P –T conditions corresponds to a minimum in Gibbs free energy. This formulation en-ables pressure- and temperature-dependent variations in mineral stability to be treated consistently throughout the interior. Individual mineral phases within HeFESTo 

are represented as solid solutions composed of mul-tiple endmember species, corresponding to chemically pure compositional endmembers of each phase. The chemical potential of each solid-solution species includes contributions from the Gibbs free energy of the pure end-member, ideal entropy, and non-ideal excess inter-actions, following the solution model implemented in 

HeFESTo (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011). This treatment allows continuous compositional variability within mineral phases and avoids artificial discretiza-tion of phase boundaries. Similar thermodynamic approaches have been implemented in codes such as 

Perple X (Connolly 1990, 2005), MELTS (Ghiorso & Sack 1995; Ghiorso 1997), and pMELTS (Ghiorso et al. 2002; Balta & McSween Jr 2013). More broadly, the overall framework adopted in this study follows a two-step ap-proach: translating host-star elemental abundances into exoplanet mantle oxide stoichiometry, and subsequently using these compositions as inputs to Gibbs free-energy minimization models, such as HeFESTo or Perple X , to estimate mantle phase abundances and structure. This framework builds directly upon established methodolo-gies from earlier studies (Dorn et al. 2015, 2017; Un-terborn & Panero 2017; Spaargaren et al. 2020, 2023; Guimond et al. 2023; Wang et al. 2022). The HeFESTo thermodynamic database contains abroad range of minerals relevant to planetary interiors, with equations of state and thermodynamic parameters calibrated over wide pressure and temperature ranges (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2005, 2024). Recent up-dates to the database incorporate improved descriptions of iron-bearing phases, including the effects of iron par-titioning and high-pressure spin transitions, thereby ex-tending the applicability of the model to non-Earth-like bulk compositions (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2024). In this study, we adopt a physically motivated subset of mineral phases from the (2024) version of the HeFESTo 

database that is appropriate for rocky planetary mantles (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2024). This selection is designed to capture the dominant mineralogical behavior relevant to terrestrial and super-Earth interiors while avoiding unnecessary overparam-eterization of the inferred compositions. The mineral phases considered in this work are shown in Figure 5. 2.6. Sensitivity Analysis 

While the described framework links stellar chemistry to mantle mineralogy, the predicted phase assemblages depend strongly on both the bulk elemental composition of the host star and the mantle pressure–temperature (P –T ) profile. The P –T profile is primarily controlled by mantle potential temperature, convective efficiency, thermal gradients, and the internal density and gravity structure set by the planetary mass and radius. Because mineral phase stability is determined by Gibbs free energy minimization at given P and T , even moderate variations in the mantle P –T profile can shift phase boundaries and significantly alter phase propor-tions (wt%). It is therefore important to quantify the sensitivity of the predicted mineralogy to plausible un-certainties in the P –T profile. A similar dependence is expected for the bulk elemental composition of GJ 486b. As described in Section 2.2, the inferred bulk elemental abundances depend on the adopted model and its asso-ciated uncertainties. The calculated oxide compositions are also expected to contain errors inherently. Variabil-ity in oxide composition within these errors ranges can directly affect the resulting phase diagrams. The upper and lower error bounds might show distinct phases that did not appear in the modal abundances. It is thus im-portant to perform a sensitivity analysis of these bounds on the phase diagrams. In this work, we perform a controlled P –T profile sen-sitivity analysis by perturbing the baseline temperature 10 Mineral References 

Abbr. Mineral Name Chemical Formula plg Plagioclase feldspar NaAlSi 3O8 CaAl 2Si 2O8

sp Spinel MgAl 2O4

opx Orthopyroxene (Mg,Fe,Ca)(Mg,Fe,Al)(Si)(Si,Al)O 6

c2c C2/c structured clinopyroxene (Fe,Mg) 2Si 2O6

cpx Clinopyroxene (Na,Ca,Mg)(Fe,Al,Mg)(Si)(Si,Al)O 6

wo Wollastonite CaSiO 3

pwo Pseudo-wollastonite CaSiO 3

gt Garnet (Ca,Fe,Mg,Na) 2(Ca,Fe,Mg)(Fe,Al,Cr,Mg,Si)(Fe,Al,Cr,Si)(Si) 3O12 

cpv Ca-perovskite CaSiO 3

ol Olivine (Mg,Fe) 2SiO 4

wa Wadsleyite (Mg,Fe) 2SiO 4

ri Ringwoodite (Mg,Fe) 2SiO 4

il Ilmenite-structured phase (Al,Cr,Fe,Mg)(Al,Cr,Si,Fe)O 3

pv Bridgmanite / Perovskite (Al,Ca,Cr,Fe,Mg)(Al,Si,Cr,Fe)O 3

ppv Post-perovskite (Al,Cr,Fe,Mg)(Al,Cr,Si,Fe)O 3

cf Calcium-ferrite structured phase (Fe,Mg,Na)(Al,Fe,Cr)(Al,Si,Fe,Cr)O 4

nal NAL phase Na(Mg,Fe,Na)(Al 3)(Al,Si) 2SiO 12 

mw Magnesiowüstite (Mg,Fe)O 

qtz Quartz SiO 2

coes Coesite SiO 2

st Stishovite SiO 2

apbo -PbO 2-type SiO 2 SiO 2

ky Kyanite Al 2SiO 5

neph Nepheline NaAlSiO 4

Figure 5. Reference mineral phases used in this study, showing their abbreviations, full mineral names, and representative chemical formulae. The listed phases correspond to the subset of mineral assemblages common to both the devolatilized Earth reference composition and the GJ 486b bulk compositions explored in this paper. Only phases that attain non-negligible stability over the pressure-temperature range sampled in our models are shown, and these phases are consistently illustrated in the phase diagrams throughout the paper. 

profile while keeping the bulk composition fixed. We also conduct a bulk composition sensitivity analysis by evaluating variations within the corresponding compo-sitional uncertainty bounds. This approach allows us to isolate the thermodynamic response of mantle mineral-ogy to thermal and compositional variations. 

3. RESULTS We present results for the potentially rocky planet GJ 486b as a case study. In this section, we first discuss the model selection for the host star GJ 486 and then pro-ceed to the inferred bulk composition and corresponding mineralogy of GJ 486b. 3.1. Stellar Model Selection for GJ 486 11 In the case of GJ 486b, the ExoInt results show a significant difference between the MvNP and MvNA models (see Figure 8 and Table 1). In terms of bulk oxygen availability, ExoInt (Wang et al. 2019b) sam-ples the partitioning of oxygen among Fe, Ni, and S using a Monte Carlo approach. The residual unoxi-dised metal ( ∼ 0.511 wt% for MvNA; ∼ 0.035 wt% for MvNP) and the remaining oxygen after oxide formation (∼ 0.128 wt% for MvNA; ∼ 1.292 wt% for MvNP) rep-resent the median values calculated across all iterations. While any individual model realization strictly yields ei-ther excess metal or excess oxygen, but never both, the median values of both quantities can be simultaneously non-zero when the ensemble of Monte Carlo realizations spans both outcomes. For MvNA, both median residuals are small, indicating that the bulk composition lies very close to the boundary of stoichiometric oxygen balance. In contrast, the MvNP results indicate a predominantly oxygen-rich regime. As a result, when ExoInt partitions iron between the core and mantle based on the available oxygen in the sys-tem, the higher oxygen abundance in the MvNP model leads to greater oxidation of iron, stabilizing FeO in the mantle ( ∼30.52 wt%). In comparison, the MvNA model results in a mantle with a moderate FeO content ( ∼16.27 wt%). Substantially high FeO enrichment (beyond ∼5-20 wt%, as seen in the MvNP model) would require core formation to occur under highly oxidizing conditions, in which a larger fraction of iron is retained in the silicate mantle as FeO rather than partitioning into a metal-lic core (Kilburn & Wood 1997; Righter 2003; Wade & Wood 2005). However, such high FeO abundances are generally considered unlikely for typical rocky planets. Instead, core formation is expected to occur under mod-erately reducing conditions, commonly near the iron-w¨ ustite (IW) buffer to approximately IW −3, depending on pressure and bulk composition. These conditions are consistent with the mantle FeO abundances observed for Earth ( ∼ 8 wt%), Mars ( ∼ 14–18 wt%), and some low-pressure differentiated bodies in the inner Solar Sys-tem ( ∼ 18–20 wt%) (Lodders & Fegley Jr 1997; Wade & Wood 2005; Rubie et al. 2011, 2015; Righter 2016; Doyle et al. 2019). Therefore, the MvNA model, which yields a more balanced distribution of metal and oxygen and maintains physically plausible core–mantle partitioning of iron, is considered to provide a more reliable interior composition for GJ 486b. This interpretation is also con-sistent with the global trend observed across the stellar models, where MvNA generally shows smaller residuals for most elements (see Figure 2). 3.2. Density and Pressure-Temperature Structure 

The Earth and GJ 486b show modest differences in their interior structures. While Earth has a mantle thickness of ∼ 2900 km (0.462 R⊕), GJ 486b has a thicker mantle of ∼ 3966 km (0.463 Rp). We note that the core radius fraction and core-mantle bound-ary (CMB) depth for GJ 486b adopted here are derived following Sahu et al. (2025), who assume an Earth-like baseline core mass fraction and core light-element com-position (20%; 12% silicon, 7% oxygen, and 1% sulfur). In reality, variations in the bulk planetary Fe/Si ratio, mantle Fe/FeO partitioning, or core light-element frac-tion would shift the CMB depth and pressure. For exam-ple, a higher bulk Fe/Si ratio would reduce the mantle thickness and alter the CMB pressure, whereas varia-tions in Fe/FeO partitioning would further modify the mantle structure and pressure profile. While this as-sumption may not be generally applicable, developing a fully self-consistent model that simultaneously accounts for variations in bulk composition, core-mantle parti-tioning, and core light-element composition is beyond the scope of this study. Owing to its larger size, the mantle density of GJ 486b reaches up to ∼ 1.5× that of Earth (see Figure 4 in Sahu et al. (2025)). The pressure–depth profile of GJ 486b also exceeds that of Earth in our calculations, with the core–mantle boundary located at approximately 390 GPa for GJ 486b, compared to about 138 GPa for Earth. As a result, the adiabatic P –T profiles show a noticeable divergence between Earth and GJ 486b. We use the P –T profile of the planet after the ther-mal evolution is complete and the planet enters a cool post-magma-ocean state. The P –T profile (shown in Figure 6) represents the mantle adiabat at a man-tle potential temperature of 1572 K. It indicates that the mantle of GJ 486b experiences extreme pressure regimes even at relatively shallow depths, which may stabilize high-pressure polymorphs such as bridgman-ite, ferropericlase, post-perovskite, and majorite over a broader depth range than on Earth (Murakami et al. 2004; Boukar´ e et al. 2015). These phases extend to greater depths, with post-perovskite stabilising over a substantially broader pressure range than in the rela-tively thin D ′′ layer, where post-perovskite occurs on Earth (Murakami et al. 2004). The higher interior pres-sures of GJ 486b thus extend the stability fields of lower-mantle phases well beyond the pressure conditions acces-sible in Earth’s interior (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2012). 3.3. Bulk Mantle Composition 

Table 1 summarizes the bulk mantle composition of Earth and GJ 486b from our models and references val-12 

Table 1. Bulk mantle compositions in weight percentages (wt%) of GJ 486b and Earth (Devolatilized and 

HeFESTo ’s model). Oxide Earth a Earth GJ 486b GJ 486b (HeFESTo , wt%) (Devolatilization, wt%) (MvNP, wt%) (MvNA, wt%) SiO 2 45.00 45 .43 +3 .972  

> −4.689

30 .47 +7 .920  

> −4.660

35 .63 +6 .013 

> −6.546

Al 2O3 4.00 4.39 +0 .633  

> −0.529

4.16 +1 .539  

> −0.913

3.41 +1 .029 

> −0.774

FeO 8.24 6.01 +7 .303  

> −4.865

30 .52 +4 .570  

> −12 .193

16 .27 +9 .257 

> −9.403

MgO 38.88 39 .39 +5 .590  

> −4.770

30 .72 +12 .407  

> −5.161

39 .45 +11 .378 

> −8.231

CaO 3.18 3.58 +0 .493  

> −0.428

2.96 +1 .034  

> −0.645

3.71 +1 .137 

> −0.832

Na 2O 0.13 ∗ 0.42 +0 .061  

> −0.052

0.37 +0 .133  

> −0.058

0.47 +0 .128 

> −0.083

Cr 2O3b 0.57 0.78 +0 .120  

> −0.105

0.80 +0 .282  

> −0.185

1.07 +0 .329  

> −0.252
> a

Refer Table 2 from Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni (2024).  

> b

Cr has been incorporated by extrapolating its devolatilization coefficient from those of Fe and Si based on their Tc,50 values, following the methodology of Wang et al. (2022).  

> ∗

Na 2O is exceptionally low here. Refer to Table 3 from Workman & Hart (2005). 

Figure 6. Comparison of mantle adiabatic P –T profiles for Earth and the exoplanet GJ 486b. 

ues mentioned in Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni (2024). Our results indicate that GJ 486b is substantially Fe-rich. The MvNP and MvNA models show FeO contents of ∼ 30 .52 wt% and ∼ 16 .27 wt%, respectively, com-pared to ∼ 8.24 wt% and ∼ 6.01 wt% for Earth, as reported by Workman & Hart (2005) and predicted by the devolatilised Earth model In contrast, SiO 2 is significantly depleted in GJ 486b, with values of ∼ 30 .47 wt% and ∼ 35 .63 wt% for the MvNP and MvNA models, respectively, whereas Earth shows higher values of ∼ 45 wt% in both models. The MgO abundance in the MvNA model ( ∼ 39 .45 wt%) remains close to terrestrial values but decreases signif-icantly in the MvNP model ( ∼ 30 .72 wt%). Also CaO shows some variation, with values of ∼ 2.96 wt% and 

∼ 3.71 wt% for the MvNP and MvNA models of GJ 486b, respectively. For Al 2O3, MvNA model produces a significantly lower amount than the terrestrial values (∼ 3.41 wt%), but MvNP produces a value which falls in between the two terrestrial values in the table ( ∼ 4.16 wt%). Other minor components like Na 2O and Cr 2O3

also vary slightly. For both models, the Na 2O value remains closer to the devolatilized mantle composition (∼ 0.37 wt% in MvNP and ∼ 0.47 wt% in MvNA). However, Cr 2O3 value increases slightly in both models of GJ 486b ( ∼ 0.8 wt% in MvNP and ∼ 1.07 wt% in MvNA). These differences are also evident in the top panel of Figure 3 and in the ternary diagrams shown in Figure 4. The reduced SiO 2 and enhanced FeO contents of GJ 486b arise primarily from the super-solar Mg/Si ra-tio of its host star ([Mg/Si] = +0 .10 dex). Because MgO and SiO 2 require one and two oxygen atoms per Mg and Si atom, respectively, the relatively lower Si abundance leaves more oxygen available that would otherwise be consumed in forming SiO 2. This excess oxygen can in-stead oxidise Fe to form FeO, a mechanism previously identified by (Unterborn & Panero 2017). This effect is further supported by the devolatilisation corrections and oxygen mass-balance partitioning framework adopted in 

ExoInt (Wang et al. 2019b). 13 In traditional petrological models, the oxidation state is specified by selecting a buffer that fixes the ratio of FeO to metallic Fe at a given pressure and tempera-ture. In contrast, ExoInt estimates iron partitioning using the oxygen mass-balance framework described in Section 2.3. Within this framework, the FeO abundance and core mass fraction are determined by the available oxygen budget inherited from the devolatilized stellar composition rather than by prescribing a fixed oxygen fugacity buffer (Wang et al. 2022). The higher oxygen availability in the MvNP composition, therefore, results in greater abundance of FeO within the mantle, whereas the lower oxygen budget in the MvNA composition leads to increased retention of metallic iron. This distinct bulk chemistry directly impacts min-eral stability. Since phase assemblages are computed through Gibbs free energy minimization at fixed bulk compositions, increasing bulk FeO modifies the thermo-dynamic equilibrium conditions, leading to changes in the stable phase assemblage and in the distribution of Fe among silicate and oxide solid solutions. Increased FeO stabilizes ferropericlase and Fe-bearing bridgmanite while reducing the relative stability of silica-rich phases such as stishovite. Consequently, the mineralogical dif-ferences between Earth and GJ 486b follow systemati-cally (see Figures 7 and 8), arising primarily from the Fe/Mg/Si shifts imposed at the bulk composition stage. 3.4. Benchmarking Earth against HeFESTo 

We first perform a consistency check on the results obtained from the ESH framework by comparing the predicted Earth’s mantle mineralogy with a reference phase diagram generated independently using HeFESTo 

(Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011). This reference model serves as a benchmark for Earth’s mantle and has been widely adopted and tested in previous studies (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011, 2024). The de-volatilization model of ExoInt is calibrated using the Earth-Sun system and Solar System data, reproducing a particular model of Earth’s composition as a proof of concept (Wang et al. 2019a,b). The default oxide com-position in HeFESTo (the depleted upper mantle compo-sition from Workman & Hart (2005), given in Table 1) differs slightly from that adopted in the ExoInt calibra-tion. This discrepancy may lead to small differences in the predicted baseline phase assemblages. Figure 7 compares mantle phase diagrams for the benchmark and our model for Earth. The upper panel of Figure 7 shows the reference phase diagram for Earth, generated using the mantle composition provided in 

HeFESTo by default and the corresponding phase equi-librium calculations performed using HeFESTo (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011). Hereafter, this is referred to as the HeFESTo -only framework. The lower panel of Figure 7 shows the phase diagram for Earth in which the bulk composition is first calculated using the MvNP stellar model and then the ESH framework is applied. As both phase diagrams are constructed using the same thermodynamic framework, any differences in mineral stability domains and modal proportions can be directly attributed to variations in bulk major oxide composition rather than to differences in phase equilibrium method-ology Hence, this comparison provides a robust test of whether the compositional modifications introduced by the ESH framework preserve the first-order mineralogi-cal structure of Earth’s mantle. The phase diagrams reveal that the broad mineralog-ical architecture of the mantle remains consistent be-tween the HeFESTo -only and ESH frameworks, although the relative stability domains and proportions of the major phases show some systematic differences. In the 

HeFESTo -only results, the upper mantle is dominated by olivine, orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, and garnet, with broadly comparable stability regimes for orthopyroxene and clinopyroxene. In this model, the phase propor-tion of clinopyroxene at all depths is slightly smaller while orthopyroxene is slightly enriched. As depth in-creases, olivine undergoes its first major polymorphic transition to wadsleyite near 410 km, followed by the transition from wadsleyite to ringwoodite around 500 km, marking the progression through the transition-zone assemblages. Pyroxenes also undergo breakdown across this interval ( ∼ 410–660 km), producing majoritic gar-net, ilmenite, and other associated high-pressure silicate phases. In the ESH framework results, the upper mantle is characterized by the same dominant mineral assemblage of olivine, orthopyroxene, clinopyroxene, and garnet. However, subtle differences in modal proportions are ob-served. Orthopyroxene stability domain decreases by a small amount, while clinopyroxene occupies slightly higher phase proportion than the benchmark model. The olivine and garnet field narrows moderately. De-spite these differences, the sequence of olivine polymor-phic transitions is preserved, with the olivine–wadsleyite transition occurring near ∼ 410 km and the wadsleyite– ringwoodite transition near ∼ 500 km. Pyroxenes simi-larly undergo breakdown across the transition zone, pro-ducing the same phases over comparable depth ranges. Within Earth’s transition zone, the benchmark model shows well-defined wadsleyite and ringwoodite stability ranges, accompanied by the development of ilmenite and other high-pressure silicate phases. The same can also be observed in the ESH framework, as shown in Fig. 7. 14 Phase proportion Phase proportion Mineral phase diagram - Earth (HeFESTo data) 

> apbo
> c2c
> cf
> cpv cpx fea
> fee
> feg
> gt
> il
> mw
> nal
> ol
> opx
> plg
> ppv
> pv
> pwo
> ri
> sp
> st
> wa wo

pv 

mw 

ppv 

ol 

cpx 

gt 

ri 

wa 

ol 

mw 

ppv 

gt 

ri 

opx 

cpv Mineral phase diagram - Earth (Devolatilized) 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 Depth (km) 0.0 

pv  

> Figure 7. Comparison of Earth’s mantle phase assemblages as a function of depth (x-axis) for two different bulk composition prescriptions. Top panel: phase proportions (in wt%) obtained using bulk composition and phase-equilibrium calculations from
> HeFESTo . Bottom panel: phase proportions (in wt%) obtained using a bulk composition derived by applying the devolatilization model to solar abundances.

In the HeFESTo -only results, ringwoodite breaks down to form bridgmanite (Mg-perovskite), calcium-perovskite and ferropericlase, establishing the lower mantle assem-blage. This region remains dominated by bridgmanite with subordinate ferropericlase and calcium-perovskite throughout most of the lower mantle. At greater depths, bridgmanite undergoes its final major transformation into post-perovskite, typically around 2600–2700 km depth, marking the deepest mineralogical transition. The ESH framework reproduces the same lower mantle phase sequence, including the formation of bridgmanite and ferropericlase and the appearance of post-perovskite in the lowermost mantle. However, the devolatilized composition results in breakdown of bridgemanite at a relatively shallower depth to form post-perovskite at around 2300 km depth. As a result, the bridgman-ite field gets reduced while post-perovskite occupies a slightly larger region of the figure in the lower mantle compared to the HeFESTo -only framework. The stabil-ity regions of magnesiow¨ ustite and calcium perovskite also increase slightly. Overall, the slight mineralogical differences between the results obtained from the HeFESTo -only and ESH frameworks reflect small increases in bulk Mg/Fe and lower incompatible element content, which modestly ad-just the stability of olivine, pyroxenes, bridgmanite, fer-ropericlase, and related phases. These trends are consis-tent with experimental high-pressure studies (Fei et al. 15 2004; Murakami et al. 2004; Hirose 2006). Importantly, the major phase sequence, transition pressures, and overall mantle structure remain effectively unchanged, indicating that both models produce broadly similar mineralogical profiles despite these subtle compositional shifts. 3.5. Mineralogy of GJ 486b and Comparison with Earth 

Figure 8 shows the mineral phase diagram for GJ 486b, revealing a mantle mineralogy extending to sub-stantially higher pressures than that of Earth (see Figure 4 of Sahu et al. (2025)). Although the overall sequence of silicate phase transitions broadly resembles that of Earth, notable differences are observed in the stability domains and modal abundances of major minerals. In GJ 486b, mineralogical transitions occur over shorter depth intervals, high-pressure phases stabilize at rela-tively shallower depths, and several phases show either expanded or reduced stability domains relative to Earth. These systematic shifts reflect the steeper pressure gra-dient and stronger gravity characteristic of super-Earth interiors (Valencia et al. 2006; Seager et al. 2007). While the steeper pressure gradient of GJ 486b pro-motes earlier stabilization of high-pressure polymorphs, the elevated bulk FeO and reduced SiO 2 content shift equilibrium toward Fe-rich phases, expanding the sta-bility domain of magnesiow¨ ustite and reducing the rela-tive abundance of bridgmanite. Thus, the observed min-eralogical shifts arise from a coupled effect of pressure scaling and bulk compositional modification. 3.5.1. Upper Mantle Assemblage 

Our results show that, on GJ 486b, the upper mantle is dominated by olivine, accompanied by spinel, clinopy-roxene, garnet, magnesiow¨ ustite, and plagioclase (Fig-ure 8). This general mineral assemblage is similar to that of Earth, and the sequence of low-pressure silicate phases follows the terrestrial upper mantle mineralogy predicted by thermodynamic models. However, notable differences arise in the relative sta-bility regimes and modal abundances. Our results indi-cate a smaller clinopyroxene stability zone in GJ 486b compared to Earth’s mantle, along with a broadened spinel and olivine stability zone for both the MvNP and MvNA model. These changes reflect the onset of high-pressure effects at relatively shallow depths in the man-tle of GJ 486b. 3.5.2. Transition Zone Assemblage 

Within the transition zone of GJ 486b, olivine under-goes rapid polymorphic transformations to wadsleyite and subsequently to ringwoodite over a narrow depth in-terval. This zone is primarily composed of assemblages bearing garnet, ilmenite, wadsleyite, and ringwoodite, along with small amounts of calcium-ferrite. The overall sequence of olivine polymorphic transi-tions remains consistent with that of Earth, indicating similar phase relations. However, the garnet stability zone is significantly reduced, and both the stability do-main and the modal abundance of ringwoodite are de-creased. Although the wadsleyite zone spans a similar depth range to that on Earth, its modal abundance is lower in GJ 486b. We also observe a noticeable amount of ilmenite in the MvNP model, which is negligible in the MvNP model. However, both of these show reduced abundances relative to Earth’s mantle. In addition, the calcium-ferrite structured phase becomes noticeable in case of GJ 486b, especially in the MvNP model, which was negligible for the case of Earth. These changes indi-cate a transition-zone mineralogy characterized by dif-ferent proportions of intermediate-pressure phases. 3.5.3. Lower Mantle Assemblage 

Below the transition zone, ringwoodite breaks down to form a lower-mantle assemblage dominated by bridgmanite, magnesiow¨ ustite, calcium perovskite, and calcium-ferrite. This assemblage is broadly similar to Earth’s lower mantle in terms of mineral sequence and phase identity. However, several systematic differences are evident in this region. The stability domain of bridgmanite is sig-nificantly shrunk. Since bridgmanite has the stoichiom-etry (Mg,Fe)SiO 3, its abundance is limited by the avail-able SiO 2 in the bulk mantle. The lower SiO 2 content of GJ 486b therefore restricts bridgmanite formation and favors the formation of magnesiow¨ ustite. As a result, magnesiow¨ ustite shows occupies a larger region in the lower mantle. The calcium-ferrite structured phase also shows a broad stability zone in GJ 486b (specially for MvNP model). Calcium perovskite remains stable over a depth range comparable to that on Earth, but its modal abundance is increased. These shifts indicate redistribution of modal proportions (as mentioned in Table 1) among the lower-mantle phases under higher pressure conditions. At greater depths, bridgmanite transforms into post-perovskite, producing a mantle assemblage dominated by post-perovskite together with magnesiow¨ ustite and calcium perovskite. While this phase transition is also present on Earth, its expression differs in GJ 486b. In case of MvNA model, the transition of bridgemanite to post-perovskite occurs at a depth comparable to that of Earth ( ∼ 2300 km), whereas in the MvNP model, it oc-16 Phase proportion Phase proportion Mineral phase diagram - GJ 486b (MvNA) 

> apbo
> c2c
> cf
> cpv cpx fea
> fee
> feg
> gt
> il
> mw
> nal
> ol
> opx
> plg
> ppv
> pv
> pwo
> ri
> sp
> st
> wa wo

pv 

mw 

ppv 

ol 

cpx  gt 

ol 

mw 

ppv 

gt 

ri 

cf sp 

cpv Mineral phase diagram - GJ 486b (MvNP) 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 Depth (km) 0.0 

pv 

ri 

Figure 8. Phase assemblages of GJ 486b as a function of depth derived from two stellar abundance inference approaches. The MvNP model (top), conditioned only on stellar parameters, and the MvNA model (bottom), which incorporates observed abundance correlations, both predict a strongly olivine-rich upper mantle and a lower mantle dominated by bridgmanite, with post-perovskite stable in the lowermost mantle. Variations in phase proportions (wt%) and transition depths between the two cases highlight how uncertainties in inferred stellar abundances propagate into the predicted interior mineralogy. 

curs at a much shallower depth ( ∼ 1800 km) reflecting the effect of high pressure and composition changes at shallower depths. Compared to Earth, the modal abun-dance of post-perovskite in GJ 486 b is lower at any given depth. This is a direct consequence of the silica-limited bridgmanite stability field and the correspond-ing expansion of the magnesiow¨ ustite field. However, because GJ 486b possesses a substantially larger mantle than Earth, the total amount of post-perovskite in its lower mantle is greater despite its lower modal abun-dance. Therefore, the results show that, while GJ 486b and Earth share a broadly similar sequence of silicate phase transitions, the mantle of GJ 486b shows systematic dif-ferences in depth distribution and modal abundances. Relative to Earth, GJ 486b displays slightly smaller stability domain and abundances of pyroxenes, gar-net, ringwoodite, and bridgmanite, alongside expanded stability domains of spinel, magnesiow¨ ustite, calcium-ferrite, and calcium perovskite. These mineralogical dif-ferences reflect the steeper pressure-temperature gradi-ent of GJ 486b, which promotes earlier stabilization of high-pressure phases, as well as bulk compositional dif-ferences that favor Fe-bearing phases (Valencia et al. 2006; Unterborn et al. 2018; Unterborn & Panero 2019). 17 3.6. P-T Sensitivity of Mantle Mineralogy 

To test the robustness of the obtained mineral phase proportions for GJ 486b, we perturbed the P –T profile by varying the mantle potential temperature by ±50 K, 

±100 K, and ±200 K, while keeping the bulk composi-tion fixed. These calculations were performed separately for both the MvNP and MvNA models. 9 and 10 show the resulting modal abundances and their deviations from the baseline model (bar plots) for mineral phases that show significant variations in the MvNA and MvNP abundance models, respectively. For the cases where deviations are below 0.1%, we consider the variations to be negligible. For the MvNP model, the temperature variations have little effect on the mineralogy at the upper portion of the lower mantle (700-2100 km), whereas noticeable shifts can be observed at the shallower (0-700 km) and deeper (2100-2800 km) depths. Again, at much deeper parts, no variations can be seen for the temperature perturbation. For temperature offsets of up to ±50 K, the phase as-semblage remains almost unchanged for most pressure levels. Though minor redistribution occurs among co-existing silicates, the dominant phases at each depth remain stable, and the modal differences stay well be-low the level required to alter the overall mineralogical structure. At ±100 and ±200 K, variations become more appar-ent. Moderate adjustments in the proportions of high-pressure silicates emerge, reflecting the temperature de-pendence of their stability zones, yet the underlying as-semblage remains unchanged. The variations are gen-erally below 10% for most phases except bridgemanite and post-perovskite (2100-2800 km depth interval). The iron-bearing phases, such as garnet, ilmenite, ringwood-ite, bridgemanite, and post-perovskite are showing the largest variations. In the upper mantle region, where multiple phases coexist, the perturbations produce only small shifts in relative abundances rather than introduc-ing new stable phases. The strongest sensitivity occurs near the perovskite to post-perovskite transition (2500–3000 km). Here, noticeable redistribution between perovskite and post-perovskite is produced due to changes in P –T condi-tions for all three temperature perturbation conditions. However, this effect is confined to a narrow depth range near ∼ 2600 km, associated with the shift of the pv–ppv transition. At greater depths, the mantle stabilizes into a dominant phase field, and modal abundances again be-come largely insensitive to temperature perturbations. In the case of the MvNA model, temperature vari-ations of ±50 K have little effect on the mineralogy throughout the mantle, and noticeable shifts begin to appear only when the perturbation reaches ±100 and 

±200 K. Though a similar trend can also be seen for this model, the variations are always below 10% throughout the mantle. The purpose of the P –T sensitivity analysis text is to assess whether the use of Earth-calibrated density rela-tions to construct the interior profile of GJ 486b intro-duces significant mineralogical bias. Although the bulk mantle composition derived from ExoInt differs from that of Earth, the structural calculation within SERPINT 

assumes an Earth-like density framework to generate the pressure profile. Our results show that, for temperature variations of up to ±200 K, the dominant mantle phase assemblage remains stable across most of the interior (as shown in Figures 9 and 10). The greatest sensitivity is confined to narrow depth regions near major phase boundaries, particularly the perovskite to post-perovskite transition. Outside these boundary regions, modal abundances vary only modestly. This indicates that reasonable uncer-tainties in the adopted P –T profile do not significantly alter the first-order mineralogical structure of GJ 486b. The dominant control on mantle mineralogy arises from bulk composition, while temperature primarily modu-lates transition depths rather than phase identity. 3.7. Sensitivity analysis of mineralogy against bulk compositional and stellar abundance models 

The stellar abundances derived from Gaia DR3 carry observational uncertainties that propagate through the 

ExoInt and HeFESTo workflow, leading to uncertainties in the predicted mantle mineralogy. To assess the ro-bustness of our results, we perform a sensitivity analy-sis using the upper and lower uncertainty bounds of the bulk compositions derived from the MvNP and MvNA stellar abundance models. The median bulk compositions for the MvNP and MvNA models are listed in columns 4 and 5 of Table 1, respectively. The corresponding upper and lower un-certainty bounds are applied to these median composi-tions, and the resulting equilibrium phase assemblages are calculated using the ESH framework, keeping the 

P –T profile fixed. In Figures 12 and 14, we show the sensitivity plot for mineral phases that show variations greater than 10% relative to the median values. 3.7.1. Sensitivity to composition in the MvNP model 

Figure 11(a) and (b) show the mineral phase dia-grams corresponding to the compositions at the upper and lower uncertainty limits, respectively, for the MvNP model, compared to the median case shown in Figure 8(a). To quantify these variations, we compute the per-18 7% 5% 15% 40% 20% 12% 

0 700 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (7%) pv (5%) gt (15%) ol (40%) wa+ri (20%) mw (12%) sp (1%)
> cpx gt mw pv ri wa
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> +0.2 +0.4 +0.2 -0.0 -0.4 -0.1 -0.3 -0.2 -0.2 +0.0 +0.3 +0.1 +0.3 +1.0 +0.4 -0.1 -1.0 -0.3 -0.6 -0.1 -2.1 -5.2 +7.3 +0.2 +0.5 +2.7 +1.0 -0.3 -2.6 -0.7 -1.0 -0.5 -2.5 -5.2 +8.9 -0.7

Temperature Sensitivity 0 700 km 

8% 63% 27% 

700 1400 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (8%) pv (63%) cf (2%) mw (27%)
> cf
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.2 +0.2 -0.4 +0.5 -0.8 +1.0

Temperature Sensitivity 700 1400 km 

8% 64% 27% 

1400 2100 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (8%) pv (64%) cf (1%) mw (27%)
> cf
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.2 +0.2 -0.4 +0.4 -0.6 +0.9

Temperature Sensitivity 1400 2100 km 

8% 28% 37% 28% 

2100 2800 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (8%) pv (28%) ppv (37%) cf (0%) mw (28%)
> cf ppv pv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.1 -1.7 +1.7 +0.1 +1.8 -1.8 -0.1 -3.6 +3.7 +0.4 +3.8 -4.1 -0.1 -7.1 +7.1 +1.5 +8.2 -9.3

Temperature Sensitivity 2100 2800 km 

8% 65% 28% 

2800 3500 km 

Median  

> cpx+opx (8%) ppv (65%) mw (28%) 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> No significant variation observed

Temperature Sensitivity 2800 3500 km 

8% 65% 28% 

3500 3966 km 

Median  

> cpx+opx (8%) ppv (65%) mw (28%) 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> No significant variation observed

Temperature Sensitivity 3500 3966 km      

> Legend for the temperature sensitivity bar plots +50 k error margin 50 k error margin +100 k error margin 100 k error margin +200 k error margin 200 k error margin

Figure 9. Temperature sensitivity of the predicted mantle mineral assemblage from the MvNA model. Each row corresponds to a 700 km depth bin spanning the full depth range of 0–3966 km. Within each row, the left panel shows a pie chart of the median mineral assemblage (in wt%) for that depth bin, with mineral groups color-coded and labeled. The right panel shows the change in phase abundance (∆ abundance, wt%) relative to the median for temperature perturbations of ±50 K, ±100 K, and ±200 K applied uniformly along the reference pressure-temperature path. Solid bars denote positive perturbations (+∆ T ), and hatched bars denote negative perturbations ( −∆T ); bar pairs are color coded by perturbation magnitude as indicated in the legend. Only phases whose relative change exceeds 10% of the median abundance are shown. 

centage change in mineral phases that are significantly affected by the uncertainty ranges. As discussed in Sections 2.2, 2.3, and 3.3, the pri-mary factor driving the large compositional variations is the choice of the stellar abundance model. The MvNP model is conditioned on stellar parameters and reflects variations across different stellar properties in the cata-log. The largest compositional variations occur for Mg, Fe, and Si. As a result, the abundances of associated Fe–Mg silicate minerals vary significantly across the un-certainty ranges (see Figure 11). In the upper mantle, the variations remain below 11%, with only changes observed in garnet, ilmenite, spinel, ringwoodite and related minerals. Sensitivity increases progressively with depth. As depth increases into the lower mantle, larger variations are observed for bridg-manite (perovskite), post-perovskite, magnesiow¨ ustite, and calcium-ferrite (as shown in Figure 11). Because the lower mantle is dominated by Mg-, Fe-, and Si-bearing phases, variations in these elemental abundances pro-duce stronger mineralogical variations than in the upper mantle. 19 7% 13% 36% 17% 7% 12% 

0 700 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (7%) pv (4%) gt (13%) ol (36%) wa+ri (17%) cf (2%) il (1%) mw (7%) sp (12%)
> cf gt il mw pv ri wa
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.1 +0.8 -0.9 +0.2 +0.7 -0.5 -0.2 -0.2 -0.6 +4.2 -0.1 -3.9 +0.4 +0.1 -0.2 +1.9 -0.9 +0.5 +0.5 -1.2 -0.3 +0.0 -1.3 +4.4 -0.3 -3.9 +1.4 -0.5 -0.5 +4.4 -0.9 +1.2 +0.0 -3.0 -0.8 +0.5 -2.4 +4.7 -0.5 -3.9 +5.4 -3.7

Temperature Sensitivity 0 700 km 

6% 56% 18% 20% 

700 1400 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) pv (56%) cf (18%) mw (20%)
> cf pv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.4 +0.3 +0.4 -0.3 -0.8 +0.6 +0.7 -0.5 -1.6 +1.2 +1.4 -1.0

Temperature Sensitivity 700 1400 km 

6% 60% 11% 22% 

1400 2100 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) pv (60%) ppv (1%) cf (11%) mw (22%)
> ppv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.2 +0.3 -0.5 +0.6 -0.9 +1.2

Temperature Sensitivity 1400 2100 km 

6% 28% 40% 24% 

2100 2800 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) pv (28%) ppv (40%) cf (1%) mw (24%)
> cf ppv pv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.3 -0.4 +0.6 -0.4 -8.8 +9.1 -0.5 -4.6 +5.0 -0.2 -8.8 +9.0 -0.5 -1.3 +1.7 -0.3 -17.6 +17.8

Temperature Sensitivity 2100 2800 km 

6% 69% 25% 

2800 3500 km 

Median  

> cpx+opx (6%) ppv (69%) mw (25%) 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> No significant variation observed

Temperature Sensitivity 2800 3500 km 

6% 69% 25% 

3500 3966 km 

Median  

> cpx+opx (6%) ppv (69%) mw (25%) 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> No significant variation observed

Temperature Sensitivity 3500 3966 km      

> Legend for the temperature sensitivity bar plots +50 k error margin 50 k error margin +100 k error margin 100 k error margin +200 k error margin 200 k error margin

Figure 10. Temperature sensitivity of the predicted mantle mineral assemblage from the MvNP model. Each row corresponds to a 700 km depth bin spanning the full depth range of 0–3966 km. Within each row, the left panel shows a pie chart of the median mineral assemblage (mass fraction, wt%) for that depth bin, with mineral groups color-coded and labeled. The right panel shows the change in phase abundance (∆ abundance, wt%) relative to the median for temperature perturbations of ±50 K, ±100 K, and ±200 K applied uniformly along the reference pressure-temperature path. Solid bars denote positive perturbations (+∆ T ), and hatched bars denote negative perturbations ( −∆T ); bar pairs are color coded by perturbation magnitude as indicated in the legend. Only phases whose relative change exceeds 10% of the median abundance are shown. 

3.7.2. Sensitivity to composition in the MvNA model 

For the MvNA model, the overall sensitivity is smaller than that observed for the MvNP model. As shown in the sensitivity plot in Figure 13, the largest composi-tional variations for the MvNA model also occur in Mg, Fe, and Si. Sections 2.2, 2.3, and 3.3 describe that the MvNA model is conditioned on elemental abundances inferred from stellar spectra, reflecting the limited availability of precise measurements for all elements. Since the mean oxide abundances in the MvNA case differ from those in the MvNP case, the abundances of associated Fe–Mg silicate minerals vary for the uncertainty-bounded com-positions, although their variations are less pronounced than in the corresponding MvNP results. For this model, all variations remain within 8% in both the upper and lower mantle. In the upper man-tle, the largest variations are observed for olivine, mag-nesiow¨ ustite, garnet, ringwoodite and wadsleyite. For the lower mantle, magnesiow¨ ustite, bridgmanite (per-ovskite), and calcium-ferrite show significant variations in the modal abundance (see Figure 11). 20 Phase proportion Phase proportion MvNP - Upper uncertainty limit 

> apbo
> c2c
> cf
> cpv cpx fea
> fee
> feg
> gt
> il
> mw
> nal
> ol
> opx
> plg
> ppv
> pv
> pwo
> ri
> sp
> st
> wa wo

pv 

mw 

ppv 

ol 

cpx  gt 

ri 

wa ol 

pv 

mw 

ppv 

gt  cf 

sp 

cpv MvNP - Upper uncertainty limit 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 Depth (km) 0.0 

il  

> Figure 11. Phase proportion (in wt%) profiles as a function of depth for the MvNP compositional model under stellar abundance perturbations. The top panel shows the positive oxide perturbation and the bottom panel shows the negative oxide perturbation relative to the median model. Phase proportions are normalized at each depth.

Overall, compositional uncertainties derived from the stellar abundance models produce variations that differ slightly in both magnitude and depth distribution be-tween the two models. The MvNA sensitivity is consis-tently smaller than that of the MvNP model, reflecting the difference in how each model is conditioned on stel-lar data. In neither case do the compositional perturba-tions alter the first-order mineralogical structure of the mantle predicted for GJ 486b by our ESH framework.  

> 4.

DISCUSSION The compositional characteristics and predicted min-eralogy derived from our analysis of GJ 486b provide new insights into the diversity of interior structures among super-Earths and how they may differ from Earth’s mantle regime. Below, we present and discuss the possible mantle mineralogy of GJ 486b, its implica-tions, and the limitations of our study. 4.1. Mineralogical Regimes for GJ 486b 

The mineralogical structure of GJ 486b reflects the combined effects of its mass, density, radius, internal thermal gradient, and Fe-rich mantle bulk composition. Although the overall sequence of silicate phase transi-tions broadly resembles that of Earth, the depth distri-bution, phase transition zones, and modal abundances of major mantle minerals differ systematically. These differences arise primarily because pressure in-creases more rapidly with depth in GJ 486b as a con-sequence of its higher mass, larger radius, and stronger 21 7% 13% 36% 17% 7% 12% 

0 700 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (7%) pv (4%) gt (13%) ol (36%) wa+ri (17%) cf (2%) il (1%) mw (7%) sp (12%)
> cf cpv cpx gt il mw pv pwo ri sp wa
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -1.4 -0.3 +2.5 +10.6 -2.0 -1.9 -0.7 -7.6 -1.1 +4.1 -1.5 -0.1 -1.1 +5.6 -0.9 +2.6 +0.8 -0.1 -8.0 -0.1

Bulk-oxide sensitivity 0 700 km  

> 6% 56% 18% 20%

700 1400 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) pv (56%) cf (18%) mw (20%)
> cf il mw ppv pv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.2 +2.6 -4.0 +1.5 -10.0 +3.4 +6.6

Bulk-oxide sensitivity 700 1400 km 

> 6% 60% 11% 22%

1400 2100 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) pv (60%) ppv (1%) cf (11%) mw (22%)
> cf mw ppv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -2.9 -3.3 +7.4 -6.8 +2.6 -1.3

Bulk-oxide sensitivity 1400 2100 km 

> 6% 28% 40% 24%

2100 2800 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) pv (28%) ppv (40%) cf (1%) mw (24%)
> cf mw ppv pv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -0.8 -3.8 -6.5 +11.1 -0.3 +0.9 +1.6 -2.2

Bulk-oxide sensitivity 2100 2800 km 

> 6% 69% 25%

2800 3500 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) ppv (69%) mw (25%)
> mw
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -4.1 +0.8

Bulk-oxide sensitivity 2800 3500 km 

> 6% 69% 25%

3500 3966 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (6%) ppv (69%) mw (25%)
> mw
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> -4.1 +0.8

Bulk-oxide sensitivity 3500 3966 km  

> Legend for Bulk-oxide variation + error margin error margin

Figure 12. Sensitivity of mantle mineralogy to variations in composition corresponding to the upper and lower uncertainty bounds derived from the MvNP model. The data are presented in Table 1. Under compositional perturbations, the mantle mineralogy shows relatively small variations. These variations are primarily confined to the lower mantle and transition zone, particularly in magnesiow¨ ustite, bridgmanite (perovskite), and post-perovskite. 

gravity. This leads to the stabilization of high-pressure phases at shallower depths and compresses mineral sta-bility regimes relative to Earth (Sahu et al. 2025). Before discussing these regimes in detail, it is use-ful to briefly contextualize the results using the Earth validation presented in Section 3.4. The compari-son between the HeFESTo -only and ESH frameworks demonstrates that changes in bulk composition intro-duced by devolatilization lead to modest but systematic shifts in mineral stability regimes, while preserving the first-order mantle phase sequence (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011; Wang et al. 2019a). Both frameworks employ the same thermodynamic formulation to gen-erate the phase diagram, so these differences primar-ily reflect variations in bulk composition rather than methodological effects. As shown in Table 1, the de-volatilized Earth (BSE) composition shows relative en-richment in SiO 2, Al 2O3, MgO, CaO, and Cr 2O3 accom-panied by slight depletion in FeO compared to the pre-devolatilization HeFESTo -Earth composition. This pat-tern reflects the preferential retention of refractory com-ponents and the relative depletion of moderately volatile and siderophile elements during planetary devolatiliza-tion. Such oxide redistribution is consistent with the ex-pected compositional effects of volatile loss (McDonough & Sun 1995). Also, Na 2O shows an apparent enrich-ment in devolatilized composition that is due to the fact that the ExoInt model reconstructs Earth’s primitive 22 Phase proportion Phase proportion MvNA - Upper uncertainty limit 

pv 

mw 

ppv 

ol 

cpx  gt 

ri 

ol 

pv 

mw 

ppv gt 

ri 

cf sp 

cpv MvNA - Lower uncertainty limit 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2 0.0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 Depth (km) 0.0  

> apbo
> c2c
> cf
> cpv cpx fea
> fee
> feg
> gt
> il
> mw
> nal
> ol
> opx
> plg
> ppv
> pv
> pwo
> ri
> sp
> st
> wa wo
> Figure 13. Phase proportion (in wt%) profiles as a function of depth for the MvNA compositional model under stellar abundance perturbations. The top panel shows the positive oxide perturbation, and the bottom panel shows the negative oxide perturbation relative to the median model. Phase proportions are normalized at each depth.

mantle composition, predicting 0.42 wt% Na 2O. This is in agreement with standard BSE empirical estimates (0.36 wt%; (McDonough & Sun 1995)). In contrast, for 

HeFESTo the mantle composition follows the depleted MORB mantle (DMM) estimate of Workman & Hart (2005), in which incompatible elements such as Na have been extracted into the continental crust over geologic time. For the devolatilized Earth composition, we ob-serve a slight narrowing of the olivine and bridgman-ite stability zones, and slight broadening of the magne-siow¨ ustite field. These variations are consistent with ex-perimental constraints on the sensitivity of mantle min-eralogy to Fe/Mg ratios (Fei et al. 2004; Murakami et al. 2004; Hirose 2006). The mineralogical differences between Earth before and after devolatilization are minor, whereas the dif-ferences between Earth and GJ 486b are significantly larger. This contrast indicates that the mineralogy of GJ 486b is primarily governed by intrinsic planetary prop-erties, including its bulk composition, P –T profile and larger size and mass, rather than by modeling artifacts (Unterborn & Panero 2019). Figures 7 and 8 show that the upper mantle of GJ 486b is dominated by olivine, with subordinate pyrox-enes, garnet, spinel, and magnesiow¨ ustite. While this assemblage is broadly similar to that of Earth, the rela-tive stability regimes show modest differences. Clinopy-roxene occupy smaller stability range, and orthopyrox-ene became unstable, whereas the spinel regime is mod-23 7% 5% 15% 40% 20% 12% 

0 700 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (7%) pv (5%) gt (15%) ol (40%) wa+ri (20%) mw (12%) sp (1%)
> cf cpv fee feg gt mw ol pv ri sp wa
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> +0.1 -0.2 +2.1 +6.1 -4.1 -0.7 -2.7 +0.6 -1.3 +0.1 -1.4 -5.1 +3.1 +0.7 +1.8 -0.4 +0.8
> Bulk-oxide sensitivity 0 700 km
> 8% 63% 27%

700 1400 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (8%) pv (63%) cf (2%) mw (27%)
> cf mw
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> +1.9 +3.7 -1.1 -3.5
> Bulk-oxide sensitivity 700 1400 km
> 8% 64% 27%

1400 2100 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (8%) pv (64%) cf (1%) mw (27%)
> cf mw
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> +1.1 +3.9 -0.6 -3.6
> Bulk-oxide sensitivity 1400 2100 km
> 8% 28% 37% 28%

2100 2800 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (8%) pv (28%) ppv (37%) cf (0%) mw (28%)
> cf mw pv
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> +0.2 +4.1 -2.7 -3.8 +7.1
> Bulk-oxide sensitivity 2100 2800 km
> 8% 65% 28%

2800 3500 km 

Median 

> cpx+opx (8%) ppv (65%) mw (28%)
> mw
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> +4.2 -3.8
> Bulk-oxide sensitivity 2800 3500 km
> 8% 65% 28%

3500 3966 km 

Median  

> cpx+opx (8%) ppv (65%) mw (28%)
> mw
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> Abundance (wt%)
> +4.2 -3.8
> Bulk-oxide sensitivity 3500 3966 km
> Legend for Bulk-oxide variation + error margin error margin

Figure 14. Sensitivity of mantle mineralogy to variations in composition corresponding to the upper and lower uncertainty bounds derived from the MvNA model. The data are presented in Table 1. The overall mantle mineralogy remains largely unchanged. Most variations are primarily confined to the lower mantle and transition zone, particularly in magnesiow¨ ustite, bridgmanite (perovskite), and post-perovskite, and are smaller than those observed for the MvNP sensitivity. 

estly expanded. Pyroxenes are particularly sensitive to both pressure amplification and Fe enrichment, further promoting their destabilization relative to olivine- and garnet-bearing assemblages. The transition zone of GJ 486b preserves the typ-ical olivine polymorphic sequence, with olivine trans-forming to wadsleyite and subsequently to ringwoodite (Kerschhofer et al. 1998; Wu et al. 2012). Within this transition zone, the stability range and modal abun-dances of garnet and ringwoodite are reduced. Although wadsleyite spans a depth range comparable to that on Earth, its modal abundance is lower, indicating that it is rapidly consumed by reactions leading to lower-mantle assemblages. These trends indicate a preference for as-semblages stable at higher pressures, leading to a re-duced presence of intermediate-pressure phases (Umem-oto et al. 2017). The stability of calcium-ferrite struc-tured phases within the transition zone of GJ 486b, espe-cially in the MvNP, further supports this interpretation (Iskrina et al. 2022; Shim et al. 2000). For ilmenite, both the MvNA and MvNP models show lower abundances relative to Earth’s mantle; although the variation is no-ticeable in the MvNP model, it is negligible in the MvNA model. This variation reflects differences in Fe content, as the inferred mantle FeO content in GJ 486b is higher than Earth, and also the amount in the MvNP model is almost double that in the MvNA model. Below the transition zone, the mantle of GJ 486b is dominated by bridgmanite, magnesiow¨ ustite, calcium perovskite, and calcium-ferrite, as expected for massive 24 rocky planets (Umemoto et al. 2017). Although the phase identities resemble those of Earth’s lower man-tle, both the modal proportions and the relative abun-dances of cationic endmembers within these phases differ substantially, reflecting the combined effects of extreme pressure and variable Fe/Al content on phase relations (Katsura 2025). In particular, the stability domain of bridgmanite is reduced under strong compression, while magne-siow¨ ustite occupies a larger fraction of the lower man-tle, consistent with theoretical models of super-Earth mineralogy (Umemoto et al. 2017). This redistribution of modal abundances arises from both Fe enrichment and elevated internal pressures and densities, which fa-vor dense oxide and silicate structures. The stability of calcium-ferrite further indicates that aluminous and fer-ric components are increasingly accommodated within dense high-pressure crystal structures predicted at ter-apascal conditions (Huang et al. 2026). Calcium per-ovskite remains stable over a depth range comparable to that on Earth but shows an increased modal abun-dance, consistent with enhanced Ca partitioning at high pressure. At greater depths, bridgmanite transforms into post-perovskite, producing a lowermost mantle assemblage dominated by post-perovskite, magnesiow¨ ustite, and calcium perovskite, as expected for super-Earth man-tles (Umemoto et al. 2017). Although this transition also occurs in Earth’s mantle, its expression in GJ 486b differs in both depth and extent. It occurs at an Earth-like depth in MvNA model but a slightly shallower depth in MvNP model. This shows that GJ 486b’s transition zone depends on assumptions about its interior compo-sition in the models. In addition, even though post-perovskite makes up a smaller fraction of the mantle at any given depth in GJ 486b than in Earth, due to the silica-limited bridgmanite field and the corresponding expansion of the magnesiow¨ ustite field, its much thicker mantle means post-perovskite still occupies a larger por-tion of the lower mantle overall. 4.2. Implications of Mineralogy on Mantle Physics 

The mineralogical structure of GJ 486b has im-portant implications for mantle physics and rheology. The increased abundance of ferropericlase-rich assem-blages suggests a mechanically weaker lower mantle compared to Earth, as ferropericlase is less viscous than bridgmanite-dominated assemblages (Yamazaki & Karato 2001). However, this weakening may be off-set by the planet’s high size and mass and strong gravitational gradient (Sahu et al. 2025), which pro-motes gravitational stratification and may suppress large-scale convection. At greater depths, the pres-ence of bridgmanite–post-perovskite transitions implies strong depth-dependent variations in rheology and ther-mal conductivity, as post-perovskite is more anisotropic and thermally conductive than bridgmanite (Tsuchiya et al. 2004). These contrasts are likely to favor layered or multi-regime convection, with deep mantle regions partially decoupled from upper mantle circulation. The sharp density contrast at the core–mantle boundary (see Figure 4 in Sahu et al. (2025)), together with widespread post-perovskite and Fe-rich silicates, suggests that heat transfer across the boundary may differ substantially from that of Earth. While the high thermal conductivity of post-perovskite may enhance basal mantle heating, it may also stabilize long-lived basal layers and reduce core heat loss (Murakami et al. 2004). 4.3. Limitations of the Study and Future Prospects 

The mineralogical structure of GJ 486b presented in this study is derived using a combination of modeling approaches, each of which involves inherent assump-tions and limitations. Accordingly, the predicted in-terior structure and mineralogy should be interpreted within the context of these methodological constraints. The primary limitation arises from the limited avail-ability and precision of elemental abundance measure-ments for M-dwarf host stars. The cool photospheres of M-dwarfs produce complex spectra dominated by dense molecular bands (e.g., TiO, H 2O), which merge atomic lines together. Obtaining high signal-to-noise ratio, high-resolution near-infrared (NIR) spectra from large telescopes is observationally challenging (Olander et al. 2025; Wang et al. 2024). As a result, direct and complete high-precision stellar abundance measure-ments are unavailable for many M-dwarf systems, in-cluding GJ 486. To address this limitation, we adopt a population-based approach that infers chemically consis-tent stellar abundances using statistically representative compositions rather than system-specific measurements. While this method captures the broad chemical diversity expected for M-dwarf hosts by correlating abundances with stellar parameters, it cannot fully account for star-to-star variations or unique chemical signatures (Ting et al. 2012; Ness et al. 2015). Therefore, the inferred planetary bulk compositions should be interpreted as plausible estimates rather than definitive determinations of the true composition of GJ 486b. The devolatilization model used in ExoInt to con-vert stellar abundances into planetary bulk compositions (Wang et al. 2019a,b, 2022) introduces additional un-certainties. This approach assumes that volatile loss during planet formation follows trends calibrated pri-25 marily on Solar System bodies. It further assumes that the volatility-dependent elemental depletion ob-served for Earth represents a general pathway for rocky planet formation, despite known compositional variabil-ity among terrestrial planets within the Solar System. The model does not explicitly simulate disk evolution, condensation-evaporation processes, planet migration, or accretionary impacts, and therefore captures broad compositional trends rather than system-specific forma-tion histories. Its predictions are sensitive to uncertain-ties in stellar abundance measurements and are limited to silicate-dominated compositions, making it less suit-able for highly irradiated planets or systems with non-terrestrial chemistries (Wang et al. 2019a). The interior structure and mineralogical phase equi-libria in this study also have inherent limitations. These are computed using SERPINT (Sahu et al. 2025) to de-rive P –T profiles and HeFESTo (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011) to calculate equilibrium mineral assem-blages. While these models provide a physically con-sistent framework, they rely on simplified representa-tions of planetary interiors. As discussed by Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni (2011), the thermodynamic for-mulations implemented in HeFESTo assume equilibrium phase relations and depend on parameterized equations of state calibrated primarily against experimental and theoretical constraints for Earth’s mantle conditions. At the extreme pressures and temperatures relevant to super-Earth interiors, direct experimental constraints on mineral stability, elasticity, and thermodynamic prop-erties remain sparse, requiring extrapolation beyond well-constrained regimes (Stixrude & Lithgow-Bertelloni 2011; Murakami et al. 2004). In addition, the pressure– temperature profile generated by SERPINT is based on one-dimensional interior structure and evolution models that assume laterally homogeneous material properties and parameterized convection (Sahu et al. 2025). As a result, uncertainties in mantle temperature, density, and composition propagate into the phase equilibria calcula-tions performed by HeFESTo , influencing the predicted depths of phase transitions and the stability domains of minerals. Our framework also does not capture three-dimensional mantle heterogeneity, dynamic phase dis-equilibrium, or tectonic regimes, all of which may influ-ence mineralogical distributions in planetary interiors. Despite these limitations, our approach provides a practical framework for exploring the mantle mineral-ogy of rocky exoplanets using host-star abundances to-gether with fundamental planetary parameters and their associated sensitivities. Therefore, the results presented here should be interpreted as physically motivated first-order predictions of the interior mineralogy of GJ 486b. This framework can be extended to the broader sam-ple of rocky exoplanets orbiting M-dwarfs as part of the ongoing JWST Rocky Worlds Director’s Discretionary Time program, enabling the exploration of potential links between interior mineralogy and observed atmo-spheric properties or the presence of bare rocky worlds (Xue et al. 2025).  

> 5.

CONCLUSION This work presents a physically consistent framework that connects stellar abundances to the interior struc-ture and mineralogy of rocky exoplanets. The frame-work integrates four key components: stellar abundance inference, devolatilization modeling to estimate plane-tary bulk and mantle compositions, interior structure calculations to derive pressure–temperature profiles, and thermodynamic equilibrium modeling to predict man-tle mineralogy. The framework has been benchmarked against Earth and applied to the super-Earth GJ 486b, a target of the JWST Rocky Worlds Director’s Discre-tionary Time program. The main findings of this study are summarized as follows: 1. We demonstrate that stellar chemical abundances, when combined with physically motivated de-volatilization models, provide robust constraints on planetary interior composition and mineralogy beyond those obtainable from mass and radius measurements alone. 2. To enable this, we construct a stellar abundance model which was trained on the stellar data avail-able on Gaia DR3 and Hypatia catalogs. We use a multivariate Gaussian approach to predict the in-complete elemental abundances for M-dwarfs. We obtain a physically plausible bulk composition for GJ 486b, which is validated against that of Earth. 3. By applying the devolatilization framework to solar abundances, we successfully reproduce the first-order mineralogical structure of Earth’s man-tle, including the major phase sequences and tran-sition depths. This benchmark demonstrates the internal consistency of our coupled framework and supports its application to the exoplanet targets modeled in this study. 4. Applying the framework to GJ 486b, we find that its mantle preserves the same sequence of major mineral phases as Earth’s mantle but shows signif-icant differences in modal phase abundances and transition depths, driven jointly by the planet’s 26 higher mass, steeper pressure gradient, and dis-tinct bulk Fe/Mg/Si stoichiometry. As a con-sequence of the higher interior compression and distinct bulk composition, high-pressure silicate phases, such as bridgmanite, ferropericlase, and post-perovskite, stabilise at shallower physical depths, with phase transitions occurring over nar-rower depth intervals and post-perovskite persist-ing across a substantially larger fraction of the lower-mantle volume than on Earth. 5. Overall, the differences in mantle mineralogy be-tween Earth and GJ 486b demonstrate that a planet’s mineralogical structure depends strongly on its interior P –T conditions and host-star-derived mantle composition. As observational constraints on exoplanet masses, radii, and host-star abundances continue to improve, the framework presented here provides a foundation for ex-ploring the diversity of rocky planet interiors. It also enables investigations of potential links between interior mineralogy and atmospheric properties, particularly in the era of JWST observations of rocky exoplanets, in-cluding secondary-eclipse measurements of dayside ther-mal emission. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS L.M. acknowledges funding support from the DAE through the NISER project RNI 4011. L.M. also grate-fully acknowledges support from Breakthrough Listen at the University of Oxford through a sub-award at NISER under Agreement R82799/CN013, provided as part of a global collaboration under the Breakthrough Listen project funded by the Breakthrough Prize Foundation. L.M. also extends thanks to Prof. Sumit Chakraborty from the Institut f¨ ur Geologie, Mineralogie und Geo-physik for the insightful discussions related to the in-terior chemistry of the Earth. We sincerely thank Dr. Claire Marie Guimond for the exceptionally thoughtful, constructive, and insightful review of this manuscript. REFERENCES 

Balta, J. B., & McSween Jr, H. Y. 2013, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 118, 2502, doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JE004461 Batalha, N. M., Borucki, W. J., Bryson, S. T., & et al. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal, 729, 27, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/729/1/27 Baumeister, P., Miozzi, F., Guimond, C. M., et al. 2025, Space Science Reviews, 221, 123, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-025-01248-5 Behmard, A., Ness, M. K., Casey, A. R., et al. 2025, The Astrophysical Journal, 982, 13, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adaf1f Bond, J. C., O’Brien, D. P., & Lauretta, D. S. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal, 715, 1050, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/715/2/1050 Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., & et al. 2010, Science, 327, 977, doi: 10.1126/science.1185402 Boukar´ e, C.-E., Ricard, Y., & Fiquet, G. 2015, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 120, 6085, doi: 10.1002/2015JB011929 Brugman, K., Phillips, M., & Till, C. 2021, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 126, e2020JE006731, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JE006731 Caballero, J., Gonz´ alez- ´Alvarez, E., Brady, M., et al. 2022, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 665, A120, doi: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202243548 Casey, A. R., Lattanzio, J. C., Aleti, A., et al. 2019, ApJ, 887, 73, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab4fea Connolly, J. 1990, American Journal of Science, 290, 666, doi: https://doi.org/10.2475/ajs.290.6.666 Connolly, J. A. 2005, Earth and planetary science letters, 236, 524, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2005.04.033 Dong, J., Stixrude, L. P., Asimow, P. D., & Li, J. 2026, arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.11245, doi: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2605.11245 Dorn, C., Khan, A., Heng, K., et al. 2015, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 577, A83, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424915 Dorn, C., Venturini, J., Khan, A., et al. 2017, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 597, A37, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201628708 Doyle, A. E., Young, E. D., Klein, B., Zuckerman, B., & Schlichting, H. E. 2019, Science, 366, 356, doi: 10.1126/science.aax3901 Espinoza, N., & Perrin, M. D. 2025, arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20520, doi: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2505.20520 Fei, Y., Van Orman, J., Li, J., et al. 2004, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 109, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JB002562 Ghiorso, M. S. 1997, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 25, 221, doi: https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev.earth.25.1.221 27 

Ghiorso, M. S., Hirschmann, M. M., Reiners, P. W., & Kress III, V. C. 2002, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 3, 1, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2001GC000217 Ghiorso, M. S., & Sack, R. O. 1995, Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 119, 197, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00307281 Greene, T. P., Line, M. R., Montero, C., et al. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 817, 17, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/817/1/17 Guimond, C. M., Shorttle, O., Jordan, S., & Rudge, J. F. 2023, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 525, 3703, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2486 Guimond, C. M., Wang, H., Seidler, F., et al. 2024, Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 90, 259, doi: https://doi.org/10.2138/rmg.2024.90.08 Henry, T. J., & Jao, W.-C. 2024, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 62, 593, doi: https: //doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-052722-102740 Hinkel, N. R., Timmes, F. X., Young, P. A., Pagano, M. D., & Turnbull, M. C. 2014, The Astronomical Journal, 148, 54, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/148/3/54 Hirose, K. 2006, Reviews of Geophysics, 44, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2005RG000186 Hirschmann, M. M., Withers, A., Ardia, P., & Foley, N. 2012, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 345, 38, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2012.06.031 Huang, N., Wentzcovitch, R. M., Wu, Z., et al. 2026, Earth and Planetary Science Advances, 100001, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsa.2026.100001 Iskrina, A. V., Bobrov, A. V., & Spivak, A. V. 2022, Geochemistry International, 60, 311, doi: 10.1134/S0016702922040024 Katsura, T. 2025, Communications Chemistry, 8, 28, doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s42004-024-01389-8 Kerschhofer, L., Dupas, C., Liu, M., et al. 1998, Mineralogical Magazine, 62, 617, doi: doi:10.1180/002646198548016 Kilburn, M., & Wood, B. 1997, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 152, 139, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-821X(97)00125-8 Kite, E. S., Fegley Jr, B., Schaefer, L., & Gaidos, E. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 828, 80, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/828/2/80 Lichtenberg, T., & Miguel, Y. 2024, arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04057, doi: https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2405.04057 Lichtenberg, T., Shorttle, O., Teske, J., & Kempton, E. M.-R. 2025, Science, 390, eads3660, doi: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.ads3360 Liu, F., Yong, D., Asplund, M., et al. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 495, 3961, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa1420 Lodders, K. 2003, The Astrophysical Journal, 591, 1220, doi: 10.1086/375492 Lodders, K., & Fegley Jr, B. 1997, Icarus, 126, 373, doi: https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.1996.5653 McDonough, W. F., & Sun, S. S. 1995, Chemical Geology, 120, 223, doi: 10.1016/0009-2541(94)00140-4 Mojzsis, S. J. 2022, in Prebiotic Chemistry and Life’s Origin, ed. M. Fiore (The Royal Society of Chemistry), 21–76, doi: 10.1039/9781839164798-00021 Murakami, M., Hirose, K., Kawamura, K., Sata, N., & Ohishi, Y. 2004, Science, 304, 855, doi: https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1095932 Ness, M., Hogg, D. W., Rix, H.-W., Ho, A. Y. Q., & Zasowski, G. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 808, 16, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/808/1/16 Nettelmann, N., & Valencia, D. 2021, in ExoFrontiers, 2514-3433 (IOP Publishing), 16–1 to 16–12, doi: 10.1088/2514-3433/abfa8fch16 Olander, T., Heiter, U., Piskunov, N., K¨ ohler, J., & Kochukhov, O. 2025, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 698, A289, doi: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202453476 Ortenzi, G., Noack, L., Sohl, F., et al. 2020, Scientific reports, 10, 10907, doi: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-67751-7 Putirka, K. D., & Rarick, J. C. 2019, American Mineralogist, 104, 817, doi: https://doi.org/10.2138/am-2019-6787 Quanz, S. P., Crossfield, I., Meyer, M. R., Schmalzl, E., & Held, J. 2015, International Journal of Astrobiology, 14, 279, doi: 10.1017/S1473550414000135 Ricker, G. R., Winn, J. N., Vanderspek, R., & et al. 2015, Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems, 1, 014003, doi: 10.1117/1.JATIS.1.1.014003 Righter, K. 2003, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 31, 135, doi: https: //doi.org/10.1146/annurev.earth.31.100901.145451 —. 2016, Deep Earth: Physics and Chemistry of the Lower Mantle and Core, 161, doi: https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118992487.ch13 Rogers, L. A., & Seager, S. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal, 712, 974, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/712/2/974 Rubie, D. C., Frost, D. J., Mann, U., et al. 2011, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 301, 31, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2010.11.030 Rubie, D. C., Jacobson, S. A., Morbidelli, A., et al. 2015, Icarus, 248, 89, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2014.10.015 28 

Sahu, C. K., Majumdar, L., Mridha, S., & Krishna, H. 2025, The Astrophysical Journal, 981, 80, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adabbe Seager, S., Kuchner, M., Hier-Majumder, C., & Militzer, B. 2007, The Astrophysical Journal, 669, 1279, doi: 10.1086/521346 Shim, S.-H., Duffy, T. S., & Shen, G. 2000, Journal of Geophysical Research: Solid Earth, 105, 25955, doi: 10.1029/2000JB900183 Sotin, C., Grasset, O., & Mocquet, A. 2007, Icarus, 191, 337, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2007.04.006 Spaargaren, R. J., Ballmer, M. D., Bower, D. J., Dorn, C., & Tackley, P. J. 2020, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 643, A44, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037632 Spaargaren, R. J., Wang, H. S., Mojzsis, S. J., Ballmer, M. D., & Tackley, P. J. 2023, The Astrophysical Journal, 948, 53, doi: https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/acac7d Stixrude, L., & Lithgow-Bertelloni, C. 2005, Geophysical Journal International, 162, 610, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-246X.2005.02642.x —. 2011, Geophysical Journal International, 184, 1180, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-246X.2010.04890.x —. 2012, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 40, 569, doi: 10.1146/annurev.earth.36.031207.124244 —. 2024, Geophysical Journal International, 237, 1699, doi: 10.1093/gji/ggae126 Suer, T.-A., Jackson, C., Grewal, D. S., Dalou, C., & Lichtenberg, T. 2023, Frontiers in Earth Science, 11, 1159412, doi: https://doi.org/10.3389/feart.2023.1159412 Thiabaud, A., Marboeuf, U., Alibert, Y., Leya, I., & Mezger, K. 2015, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 580, A30, doi: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201525963 Ting, Y. S., Freeman, K. C., Kobayashi, C., De Silva, G. M., & Bland-Hawthorn, J. 2012, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 421, 1231, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.20387.x Tsuchiya, T., Tsuchiya, J., Umemoto, K., & Wentzcovitch, R. M. 2004, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 224, 241, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2004.05.017 Umemoto, K., Wentzcovitch, R. M., Wu, S., et al. 2017, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 478, 40, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2017.08.032 Unterborn, C. T., Dismukes, E. E., & Panero, W. R. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 819, 32, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/1/32 Unterborn, C. T., Hinkel, N. R., & Desch, S. J. 2018, Research Notes of the AAS, 2, 116, doi: 10.3847/2515-5172/aacf43 Unterborn, C. T., & Panero, W. R. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 845, 61, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa7f79 —. 2019, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 124, 1704, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JE005844 Valencia, D., O’Connell, R. J., & Sasselov, D. 2006, Icarus, 181, 545, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2005.11.021 Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G., Prusti, T., et al. 2023, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 674, A1, doi: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202243940 Van Hoolst, T., Noack, L., & Rivoldini, A. 2019, Advances in Physics: X, 4, 1630316, doi: 10.1080/23746149.2019.1630316 Wade, J., & Wood, B. J. 2005, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 236, 78, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2005.05.017 Wang, H. S., Lineweaver, C. H., & Ireland, T. R. 2019a, Icarus, 328, 287, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2019.03.018 Wang, H. S., Liu, F., Ireland, T. R., et al. 2019b, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 482, 2222, doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty2749 Wang, H. S., Quanz, S. P., Mahadevan, S., & Deal, M. 2024, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 688, A225, doi: https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202449467 Wang, H. S., Quanz, S. P., Yong, D., et al. 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 513, 5829, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1119 Wordsworth, R., Schaefer, L., & Fischer, R. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 155, 195, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aab608 Workman, R. K., & Hart, S. R. 2005, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 231, 53, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2004.12.005 Wu, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, Y., et al. 2012, Chinese science bulletin, 57, 894, doi: https://doi.org/10.1007/s11434-011-4884-2 Xue, Q., Zhang, M., Coy, B. P., et al. 2025, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 995, L52, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae2098 Yamazaki, D., & Karato, S.-i. 2001, American Mineralogist, 86, 385, doi: https://doi.org/10.2138/am-2001-0401