Title: Intra-system Uniformity through Planetary Embryo Accumulation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.23277v1

Published Time: Tue, 25 Aug 2026 02:08:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 11

Markdown Content:
> Draft version August 25, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

Intra-system Uniformity through Planetary Embryo Accumulation 

Donald Liveoak 1 and Fred C. Adams 1, 2 

> 1Department of Physics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI 48109, USA
> 2Department of Astronomy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor MI 48109, USA

ABSTRACT Intra-system uniformity is a key trend in observed exoplanet systems. Understanding the physical mechanisms which sculpt planetary systems into uniform or non-uniform configurations will help con-strain theories of planet formation. Motivated by previous work showing that intra-system uniformity is a natural consequence of proto-planetary systems dissipating energy and settling into lower energy configurations, this paper explores the energy minimization hypothesis using N -body simulations. We find that the accumulation of planetary embryos through inelastic mergers generally dissipates a sub-stantial fraction of the system energy, but the systems do not always reach the global energy minimum. Analytic predictions indicate that planetary pairs have nearly equal masses in their lowest energy state when the total mass falls below a mass threshold. With larger total mass, one member of the pair tends to accrete most of the mass. Our numerical simulations show that pairs with masses above the threshold tend towards non-uniformity, but that the full realization of the effect occurs at a larger mass scale, a factor of ∼ 4 above the threshold. In any case, however, the low-mass planet pairs are generally more uniform than pairs with high mass, in agreement with previous work. Finally, we compare our results to the observed sample of exoplanets and find overall agreement. 

Keywords: planet formation, intra-system uniformity, dynamical evolution and stability 

1. INTRODUCTION Over recent decades, thousands of exoplanets have been discovered, broadening our understanding of the mechanisms which sculpt planetary systems. Planetary systems in the observational sample often consist of sev-eral low-mass planets in compact configurations (J. J. Lissauer et al. 2011). These compact multis tend to ex-hibit a high degree of intra-system (often called “peas-in-a-pod”) uniformity in mass (S. Millholland et al. 2017), radius (L. M. Weiss et al. 2018a,b), and period ratio (L. M. Weiss et al. 2018a). Additionally, the orbits of compact multis tend to be approximately circular and coplanar (J. Fang & J.-L. Margot 2012). Despite suggestions that these trends may arise from observational biases (L. Murchikova & S. Tremaine 2020), intra-system uniformity has been shown to be statistically robust (M. Y. He et al. 2019) and astro-physical in nature (L. M. Weiss & E. A. Petigura 2020). Elucidating the physical mechanism(s) responsible for intra-system uniformity (or the lack thereof) among ob-

> Corresponding author: Donald Liveoak dliveoak@umich.edu

served planetary systems allows us to better understand and constrain theories of planet formation. Previous studies have explored intra-system unifor-mity through population synthesis models (L. Mishra et al. 2021; A. Emsenhuber et al. 2023), N -body simu-lations (M. Goldberg & K. Batygin 2022; C. Lammers et al. 2023; T. Ghosh & S. Chatterjee 2024), and ana-lytical approaches (S. Tremaine 2015). In addition, intra-system uniformity can be under-stood as a natural outcome of a general class of for-mation scenarios in which energy dissipation is sub-stantial and angular momentum is conserved (F. C. Adams 2019). Specifically, the orbital energy of two adjacent forming planets is minimized when both em-bryos acquire nearly equal mass and attain circular and coplanar orbits. Subsequent work (F. C. Adams et al. (2020), hereafter A20) extended this result to account for the gravitational self-energy of the forming planets and found that when the total mass of neighboring bod-ies exceeds a certain critical value, it becomes energet-ically favorable for one planet to dominate and accrete most of the available material. This result naturally ex-plains the observed trend that intra-system uniformity is disrupted for systems containing giant planets (S. Wang arXiv:2608.23277v1 [astro-ph.EP] 24 Aug 2026 22017). Since the mass threshold decreases with orbital radius, this scenario also predicts that the observed uni-formity cannot extend beyond a few AU. The analysis of A20 applies to a variety of formation scenarios but makes two key assumptions. First, in or-der for intra-system uniformity to be the minimum en-ergy configuration of the system, the energy minimiza-tion must be carried out in a pairwise manner, so that each forming planet is only subject to the gravitational influence of its immediate neighbor(s). Secondly, the mechanism of energy dissipation must be rapid enough and persist for long enough to allow the system to settle into a near-optimal configuration. In this paper, we explore the energy minimization hy-pothesis in the context of pairwise planetary embryo ac-cumulation using N -body simulations. We model the late stages of planet formation as a series of inelastic mergers of planetary embryos of randomized mass which dissipate orbital energy and gravitational self-energy. For this study, we do not model the process of pebble accretion, which serves as an alternative channel for en-ergy dissipation (M. Lambrechts et al. 2014; B. Bitsch et al. 2015). Instead, we explore the extent to which pairwise collisions drive the systems to mass uniformity. We find that the energy dissipation in our model causes systems to approach the minimum energy config-uration derived in A20, although it is not rapid enough to consistently reach the global energy minimum. Fur-thermore, we analyze the observed exoplanet sample and find that planet pairs above the critical threshold de-rived in A20 tend to exhibit less mass uniformity. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, we detail our numerical set-up and highlight our model assumptions. In Section 3, we analyze the resulting intra-system uniformity of our simulated sys-tems, demonstrating overall agreement with A20. In Section 4, we evaluate our model’s assumptions and compare our results to the observed exoplanet sample. We conclude in Section 5 with a summary of our results and a brief discussion of their implications.  

> 2.

METHODS To evaluate energy minimization as a mechanism for generating intra-system uniformity, we consider the late stages of planet formation, where sub-Earth mass plan-etary embryos accumulate to form planets. Here we model the protoplanetary system as planetary embryos whose masses are a few percent of M⊕, corresponding to the later stages of the planet formation process. For typ-ical disk masses ∼ 0.5 × 10 −4 − 10 −3 M⋆ (L. Hartmann 2008; R. K. Mann & J. P. Williams 2009; I. Pascucci et al. 2016), this choice corresponds to Ne ∼ 10 3 − 10 4

embryos, which is on the upper end of what is compu-tationally feasible given that simulation run-time scales as O(N 2 

> e

) (H. Rein & S.-F. Liu 2012). We consider distributions of planetary embryos which jointly comprise a protoplanetary disk with a power-law surface density Σ( r) ∼ r−p, where p is typically inferred to be ∼ 1 − 2 in planet formation scenarios (see L. Weiss et al. 2023 and references therein). We truncate the disk at minimum and maximum orbital distances rmin 

and rmax so that Σ( r) = 



Σ0 (r/r min )−p rmin < r < r max ,

0 otherwise ,

(1) where Σ 0 is a reference surface density fixed by the total disk mass and the radii ( rmin , rmax ). 2.1. Initial conditions 

For each simulation, we uniformly select the total disk mass Mdisk /M ⋆ ∈ [0 .5, 10] × 10 −4 and surface mass den-sity power law exponent p ∈ [0 .5, 2) consistent with observations (L. Hartmann 2008; J. P. Williams & C. McPartland 2016) and previous studies on intra-system uniformity (L. Weiss et al. 2023). We note that the heaviest disks in our simulation sample may be more massive than those inferred from observations, but such heavy disks are useful for understanding the physical processes at work. For simplicity, we choose the disk to orbit a star of mass M⋆ = 1 M⊙.Each simulation begins with a disk of planetary em-bryos on circular and coplanar orbits, consistent with eccentricity and inclination damping due to interaction with the protoplanetary disk (J. Kominami & S. Ida 2002). Each embryo has a mass uniformly chosen be-tween 0 .01 M⊕ and 0 .1 M⊕, comparable to values used in population synthesis and N -body studies (A. Mor-bidelli et al. 2015; M. Yzer et al. 2025). The radius of each embryo is calculated by assuming a sphere of uniform density ρ = 5 g /cm 3, though we note that our results are not sensitive to this choice (see Section 4.1 for ρ = 2 g /cm 3). We initialize each embryo on an orbit with semi-major axis chosen according to the probability distribution im-plied by the surface density power law Σ ∼ r−p. Specif-ically, for each embryo, a uniform random number u is selected between 0 and 1, which is then used to calcu-late its initial semi-major axis via the inverse cumulative distribution function 

r(u) = 



r2−p 

> min

+ u[r2−p 

> max

− r2−p 

> min

]

1/(2 −p)

, (2) where we select rmin = 0 .05 au and rmax = 0 .5 au as the boundaries of the disk, in agreement with observed com-3pact multi-planet systems (J. N. Winn & D. C. Fabrycky 2015). The longitude of ascending node Ω, argument of periapsis ω, and mean anomaly M of each orbit are each uniformly chosen between 0 and 2 π.The total number of planetary embryos in the sim-ulation is determined by Ne = round( Mdisk /m embryo ), where membryo = 0 .055 M⊕ is the average embryo mass. We note that our random sampling procedure generally produces total mass budgets which differ slightly from the prescribed disk masses. However, since Ne ∼ 10 3 −

10 4, this effect only amounts to a small ( ∼ 1 − 2%) dif-ference between the nominal and sampled disk masses. 2.2. N-body simulations 

In order to compute statistics in various regions of parameter space, we carry out 1000 integrations of the aforementioned initial conditions, each for 1 Myr. As shown in Section 3, the vast majority of the mergers occur within the first ∼ 10 kyr of the simulation, so that 1 Myr is generally sufficient for the system to reach a stable configuration. Our simulations are carried out in the N -body code 

REBOUND (H. Rein & S.-F. Liu 2012). To efficiently han-dle collisions and close encounters, we use the hybrid integrator TRACE (T. Lu et al. 2024), which uses the sym-plectic integrator WHFast (H. Rein & D. Tamayo 2015) when all orbiting bodies are separated by more than 4 mutual Hill radii, and switches to the precise adaptive timestep integrator IAS15 otherwise (H. Rein & D. S. Spiegel 2015). During the integration, collisions are treated as perfect inelastic mergers. Specifically, when two bodies collide (i.e., when their separation is less than the sum of their radii), they are replaced by a single body whose mass is the sum of the two constituent masses. The velocity of the resulting body is calculated such that linear and angular momentum are conserved. The radius of the post-collision body is re-calculated assuming a constant density of ρ = 5 g /cm 3. In this way, the orbital en-ergy and gravitational self-energy of the resulting body is generally less than that of its constituents. Bodies that become gravitationally unbound from their star are retained in the integration but excluded from the subsequent analysis. In addition, to quantify the number of instabilities which occur after the simula-tion window of 1 Myr, we randomly select 50 of the 1000 previous integrations to run for an additional 9 Myr. As discussed below, longer-term effects do not substantially change our results.  

> 3.

RESULTS In the subsequent analysis, we neglect bodies which were ejected from each system during the integration.         

> Figure 1. Mass dispersion Dand disk mass as a function of post-instability multiplicity. Most systems have three to seven planets remaining after 1 Myr of evolution. Systems with heavier disks tend to form fewer planets. The dashed horizontal line in the middle panel indicates the horizontal line of best fit, D ≈ 0.48.

For the vast majority (97%) of systems, these ejections amount to less than ∼ 5% of the original disk mass. Additionally, we neglect bodies that have final mass less than 1 M⊕.We find that the post-instability systems generally have multiplicity N = 3 − 7 (see Figure 1), consis-tent with observed compact multi-planet systems (L. Weiss et al. 2023). Systems with a high disk mass generally formed fewer ( N ∼ 2 − 4) high-mass plan-ets, while systems with low disk mass generally formed more ( N ∼ 4 − 7) low-mass planets. The period ratio of planet pairs generally increases with the mass of the pair (Figure 2), and we find no evidence of the formation of mean-motion resonances. 4  

> Figure 2. Period ratio vs. pair mass for planet pairs in our final simulated systems. The solid and dashed curves indi-cate the binned median and mean of the simulated data, re-spectively. The blue points indicate the period ratio vs. pair mass for planet pairs in observed systems (see Section 4.2). The observed pairs often have somewhat higher period ratios at lower pair masses compared to the synthetic systems.

The planets in our sample range in mass from ∼ 1M⊕

to ∼ 100 M⊕. We find that the masses of the inner and outer-most planet in each system are systematically smaller than the rest of the system. Specifically, the inner-most planet is the lightest in ∼ 44% of systems, and likewise for the outermost planet. This mass order-ing is substantially higher than what would be expected from a random ordering of planet masses (1 /N ∼ 20% for the median multiplicity N = 5). We hypothesize that this trend arises from a narrower range of mass within the Hill sphere of the innermost and outermost protoplanets. To evaluate the degree of intra-system uniformity, we use the mass dispersion metric D = σm/m , where 

m and σm are the mean and standard deviation of the planet masses of the post-instability system, re-spectively. Smaller values of D correspond to systems which are more uniform, and D generally ranges from 

∼ 0.2 − 0.7 for observed systems (M. Goldberg & K. Batygin 2022). We may analogously define the period ratio dispersion metric Dp = σϕ/ϕ , where ϕj = Pj+1 /P j

denotes the period ratio between successive planets, and 

ϕ and σϕ are the mean and standard deviation of the set of period ratios, respectively. The distribution of the period ratios of neighboring planets in our sample is shown in Figure 3. The distri-bution is peaked near Pout /P in ≈ 2 and is well described by a log-normal distribution. For mpair = min + mout <

60 M⊕, the median period ratio is Pout /P in ≈ 1.9, whereas for mpair > 60 M⊕, it is ≈ 2.7. This finding         

> Figure 3. Distribution of period ratios among neighbor-ing planets in our simulated systems. The black line indi-cates a fit of the simulated data to a log-normal distribution. The blue histogram indicates the distribution of period ratios among observed planet pairs (see Section 4.2). The period ratios of the synthetic and observed systems are generally consistent.
> Figure 4. Mass dispersion Dvs. surface density power law slope p(Equation (1)). The black line and shaded region in-dicate the binned median and the 16th-84th percentile range. Protoplanetary disks with steeper density profiles generally produce more uniform systems.

is consistent with the expectation that pairs of heavier planets have greater Hill radii and thus form with higher degrees of separation. We find that the mass dispersion of our post-instability systems is approximately 0 .5 for N = 3 − 7(Figure 1), which is generally consistent with observed systems (M. Goldberg & K. Batygin 2022). Further-more, we find a negative Pearson correlation ( R =

−0.42) between D and the surface mass density power 5      

> Figure 5. Eccentricity vs. semi-major axis for remaining planets. The vertical dashed lines indicate the disk bound-aries rmin = 0 .05 au and rmax = 0 .5 au.

law exponent p (Figure 4). This trend is consistent with the finding that planetary systems with exactly equal mass and equal spacing have effective surface densities with p = 2 (F. C. Adams 2019). We also note that this result is in agreement with M. Y. He & E. B. Ford (2022), which found that p = 2 is generally consistent with observed multi-planet systems. We find no strong correlation between p and Dp (R = −0.07), nor between the disk mass and either D (R = 0 .02) or Dp (R = 0 .25). These null results suggest that mass uniformity is more important than period uniformity in the context of our study. Figure 5 shows the distribution of final eccentricities as a function of final semi-major axes. Planets that form within the initial boundaries of the disk rmin < a < r max 

are generally slightly eccentric e ∼ 0.1. This finding is consistent with previous studies on the late stages of planet formation with (P. C. Duffell & E. Chiang 2015) and without (J. Chambers & G. Wetherill 1998) the presence of gas. Planets near or beyond the boundary (a ≳ rmax or a ≲ rmin ) must arrive at those locations via scattering, and thus tend to exhibit higher eccentricities (e ≳ 0.3). 3.1. Instability timescales 

Among the systems which were integrated for an ad-ditional 9 Myr, we find that most ( ∼ 80 +9 

> −13

%) remain stable for the full 10 Myr integration, with a small subset (∼ 18 +12  

> −8

%) undergoing a single additional merger, and even fewer ( ∼ 2+8 

> −1

%) undergoing two additional mergers beyond those that occurred in the first Myr of evolution. The reported uncertainties are given by a 95% Wilson score confidence interval (E. B. Wilson 1927).        

> Figure 6. Heatmap showing the relative number of mergers over time. For each merger, the vertical axis indicates the average planet mass in the system immediately following the collision. The red line shows the average planet mass in each time bin. The vast majority of mergers occur within the first
> ∼10 kyr of each simulation.
> Figure 7. Distribution of stability probabilities for each simulated system, as inferred by SPOCK . Each probability in-dicates the likelihood that a given system remains stable for 10 9orbits of its innermost planet. The vertical black line indicates the median probability of stability.

For the complete set of 1000 simulations, Figure 6 shows the total number of mergers as a function of time for the first 1 Myr of evolution for each simulation. The vast majority of mergers occur within the first ∼ 10 kyr of the simulation as embryos assemble into more massive (≳ M⊕) planets. After 10 kyr, the number of mergers over time decreases substantially, indicating stability for the majority of systems. Additionally, we use the deep-learning tool SPOCK (D. Tamayo et al. 2020; E. Thadhani et al. 2025) to infer 6           

> Figure 8. Pair mass disparity ( δ) vs. ratio of pair mass to critical mass mcrit . The orange line and shaded region indi-cate the binned median and the 16th-84th percentile range. We choose 10 bins of uniform size and bounds such that each bin has at least 100 planet pairs. For m1+m2> m crit , the mass disparity increases, as predicted by A20. The vertical dotted line indicates the optimal cutoff determined by our
> t-test procedure, m1+m2= 4 .6mcrit .The horizontal lines and thin gray shaded regions surrounding them indicate the mean and standard error of the mass disparity for the low– mass and high-mass subsamples at the optimal cutoff.

the long-term stability of the systems after 1 Myr of evolution. Specifically, we use the feature classifier to find that a majority of systems are inferred to have high likelihood to remain stable for more than ∼ 10 9 orbits of their inner planet, corresponding to 10 − 500 Myr (Figure 7). Finally, we compute the mutual Hill separation be-tween neighboring planets in the post-instability sys-tems, defined by ∆ = a2 − a1

RH

(3) where a1 and a2 are the semi-major axes of the inner and outer planets, and RH , mutual Hill radius, is defined as 

RH = a1 + a2

2

 m1 + m2

3M⋆

1/3

, (4) where m1 and m2 are the mass of the inner and outer planets. We find that 91% pairs have separation ∆ ≳ 10, indicating long-term stability (B. Gladman 1993; A. W. Smith & J. J. Lissauer 2009). 3.2. Bifurcation 

As shown in A20, when a pair of planetary embryos exceeds a critical mass threshold mcrit , it becomes ener-getically favorable for one embryo to undergo runaway growth. In this section, we look for signs of this bifur-cation from mass uniformity to runaway growth in our post-instability systems. Specifically, runaway growth is energetically favored when the pair mass mpair satisfies (A20) 

mpair > m crit ≈ M⋆

 Rp

a2

 (√Λ + 2)( √Λ − 1) 2

4αg

√Λ , (5) where Rp is the planet radius, αg is an order-unity pa-rameter related to the planet structure (see A20 for de-tails), and Λ = a2/a 1 where a1 and a2 are the semi-major axes of the inner and outer planets, respectively. We note that in A20, Rp and αg are taken to be equal for both planets. We fix αg = 0 .5 (the fiducial value used in A20) in our analysis. Furthermore, in the sub-sequent analysis, we compute Rp as the average radius between the two planets in the pair. To differentiate between mass uniformity and runaway growth, we define the mass disparity between two neigh-boring planets to be 

δ = |m1 − m2|

m1 + m2

, (6) where m1 and m2 are the masses of the inner and outer planets. Specifically, when the planet masses are ap-proximately uniform ( m1 ≈ m2), we have δ ≈ 0, and when the masses are disparate ( m1 ≫ m2 or vice versa), 

δ ≈ 1. Figure 8 depicts the mass disparity δ as a function of the ratio between the pair mass mpair = m1 + m2 and the threshold mass mcrit for each pair of neighboring planets in the post-instability systems. We bin the data and compute the median mass disparity of each bin. We find that the mass disparity increases systematically as a function of mpair /m crit once mpair > m crit , sug-gesting a decrease in mass uniformity for planet pairs above the critical mass threshold. However, we note that there are still many planet pairs with m1 ≈ m2 but 

m1 + m2 > m crit , indicating that for some systems, the true minimum-energy configuration is not reached. We hypothesize that this mismatch is due to the fact that once embryos become sufficiently massive, mergers be-come rare and thus energy is not efficiently dissipated. We explore this further in Section 3.3. Additionally, we carry out a series of two-sample t-tests for various choices of the pair-mass ratio cutoff 

κ = mpair /m crit . Specifically, for various values of 

κ ∈ [0 .5, 10], we split our sample of post-instability plan-ets into two subsamples: those with mpair /m crit < κ ,and those with mpair /m crit > κ . For each choice of 

κ, we perform a two-sample t-test on the mass dispar-ity δ between the two subsamples and plot the corre-sponding p-value (Figure 9). We expect that for κ ∼ 1, 7          

> Figure 9. Results of the series of two-samples t-tests (black points) and permutation tests (blue line) on the mass dis-parity δ, as a function of the pair-mass ratio cutoff κ. The minimum p-value is 3 ×10 −18 when κ= 4 .6.

energy minimization implies that δ is distributed differ-ently between the two samples. We find that this is true (p ≲ 0.01) for κ ≳ 2, in agreement with the trend in Fig-ure 8. We stress that the p-value at the optimal choice of κ is ∼ 10 −16 times smaller than that near κ = 1. Furthermore, for each t-test, we carry out a non-parametric permutation test which makes minimal as-sumptions of the underlying distribution (E. Edgington & P. Onghena 2007). Specifically, for each κ, we ran-domly permute the mass disparities of each pair of sub-samples, assigning a “low-mass” or “high-mass” label to each element. We carry out Np = 10 5 permutations. The p-value is calculated as ( b + 1) /(Np + 1) where b is the number of permutations whose difference in mean mass disparity exceeds that of the fiducial subsamples for a given κ. The results of the permutation tests are shown in Figure 9 and match closely to the results of the t-tests. Since the permutation test can only attain a minimum p-value of 1 /(Np + 1) ≈ 10 −5, the tests are only reliable for κ ≲ 2. For the optimal cutoff κ = 4 .6, the mean mass dis-parity of the low-mass sample is 0 .269 ± 0.004 and the mean mass disparity for the high-mass sample is 0.335 ± 0.007. Although the mean mass disparities only differ by ∼ 25%, this difference represents ∼ 8 standard errors, indicating a significant trend. This finding indicates that planetary systems start to depart from mass uniformity when their total mass ex-ceeds the threshold, but full runaway behavior does not occur until the pair mass is a factor of ∼ 4 higher than the critical threshold of A20. On the other hand, this discrepancy may suggest that the fiducial parameters of A20 are off by a factor of a few, and/or indicate the ne-cessity to include additional astrophysical channels for energy dissipation. 3.3. Efficiency of energy dissipation 

In order for a system of planetary embryos to reach the minimum energy configuration, the energy dissipa-tion from inelastic collisions must be rapid enough and persist for long enough for the system to dissipate large fractions of its total energy. In Figure 10, we plot the orbital energy, gravitational self-energy, and total energy over time for several sim-ulated systems. As suggested by Figure 6, the vast majority of mergers occur within the first ∼ 10 kyr, and thus the majority of energy dissipation occurs on this timescale (Figure 10). After ∼ 10 kyr, the system evolves to an approximately Hill-stable configuration, mergers become rare, and energy dissipation effectively shuts off. For each system, we compute the characteristic timescale for energy dissipation τ = |E/ ˙E|; we find that during the period with the most rapid energy dissipation (t < 10 kyr), τ is generally ∼ 10 kyr. Thus, systems gen-erally dissipate ∼ 10 − 30% of their energy, but do not always have time to efficiently dissipate enough energy to reach the minimum energy configuration. Notice also that the dissipation of orbital energy (left panel of Figure 10) corresponds to a change of only 1 – 4%. The corresponding energy change required to reach the energy-optimized state is somewhat larger, of order 10% (see Figure 1 of F. C. Adams 2019). This discrep-ancy, again, indicates that the simulated systems do not always have time to fully reach their minimum energy configurations.  

> 4.

DISCUSSION We have shown that the rapid accumulation of rocky planetary embryos generally yields mass uniformity for 

mpair < m crit and mass disparity for mpair > m crit . In this section, we discuss the limitations of our model and highlight the applications of the energy minimization hypothesis to the observed exoplanet sample. 4.1. Model assumptions 

First, we highlight that our assumption of a uniform density of ρ = 5 g /cm 3 is not expected to hold across the range of planet masses in our sample ∼ 1 − 100 M⊕.Specifically, we expect that as a planet’s mass increases, it eventually begins to accrete gas, resulting in lower density. This change of density is manifested in different mass-radius relations for various mass regimes (J. Chen & D. Kipping 2017). For planets with lower densities 8

Figure 10. Orbital energy Eorbit = − P 

> i

GM ⋆mi/2ai (left), gravitational self-energy Eself = − P

> i

(3 /5) Gm 2 

> i

/R i (middle), and total energy E = Eorbit + Eself (right) over time for several simulated systems, each normalized by the initial simulation energy 

E0. Here, the sums are over all bound bodies, and mi and Ri are the mass and radius of the ith body. The majority of energy dissipation occurs over the first ∼ 10 kyr, consistent with Figure 6. Systems generally lose 10 − 30% of their initial energy before attaining an approximately stable configuration. 

(and thus greater radii for the same mass), we expect the effective cross section of the collision to be greater than that assumed in our model, resulting in a higher rate of collisions than found in our simulations. To evaluate the robustness of our model, we carry out an additional 200 integrations which adopt a constant density of ρ = 2 g /cm 3, closer to what is expected of gas giants. We find that the reported trends in mass disparity (Figure 8) and mass dispersion (Figure 4, Fig-ure 8) remain in the sample with lower-density plan-etary embryos. Systems in this sample typically had final multiplicity N = 3 − 7. The best-fit mass disper-sion D ≈ 0.45 for this sample is slightly lower than that of the fiducial sample. As in the ρ = 5 g /cm 3 sample, the typical eccentricity for planets in the disk region 

rmin < a < r max was e ∼ 0.1, and planets outside of the disk region had e ≳ 0.3. Likewise, the distribution of 

Pout /P in is well-approximated by a log-normal distribu-tion peaked at ∼ 2. We note that the critical pair-mass ratio cutoff inferred from the t-test procedure performed in Section 3.2 is slightly higher in the low-density sample (κ = 5 .5). This corresponds to a difference in minimal 

p-value of about five orders of magnitude compared to the fiducial sample, due to the smaller sample size. Furthermore, our model assumes that collisions are perfect inelastic mergers, which may not be true in real systems. To assess the validity of this assumption, we proceed by analyzing the distribution of impact veloci-ties following the procedure of M. Goldberg & K. Baty-gin (2022). Specifically, for a given collision of two ob-jects of masses m and m′ and radius R and R′ and im-pact angle θ, only a fraction of the masses of the two bodies interact. The interaction mass is roughly ap-

Figure 11. Top panel: distribution of vcollision /v esc for all collisions in the simulation sample; the black vertical line indicates vcollision = vesc . Bottom panel: distribution of pQ/Q ∗ 

> D

for all collisions in the simulation sample; the black vertical line indicates Q = Q∗ 

> D

. We find that the collisions are not generally violent enough to induce fragmentation. 

proximated by (Z. M. Leinhardt & S. T. Stewart 2012) 

m′ 

> int

≈ 3R′ℓ2 − ℓ3

4R′3 m′, (7) 9where the projected length ℓ is 

ℓ = ( R + R′)(1 − sin θ). (8) Then, perfect mergers are expected whenever the veloc-ity of the collision, vcollision , is less than the escape ve-locity of the post-collision body (S. T. Stewart & Z. M. Leinhardt 2012): 

vesc =

q

2G(m + m′

> int

)/R new , (9) where G is the gravitational constant and Rnew is the ra-dius of the newly-formed object (in our case, calculated by assuming a fixed density ρ = 5 g /cm 3). Additionally, colliding bodies are expected to frag-ment when the specific energy of the collision 

Q = m′v2collision 

2( m + m′) (10) is sufficiently high to unbind the mass of one body into two or more objects. Empirically, in the gravity-dominated regime, this occurs when Q exceeds the crit-ical disruption threshold 

Q∗ 

> D

= qg ρ

 R

1 cm 

b

, (11) with qg ≈ 0.5 erg cm 3 g−2 and b = 1 .36 (P. J. Armitage 2020). We plot the distributions of vcollision /v esc and pQ/Q ∗

> D

for all collisions in each simulation in our sample in Fig-ure 11. We find that most collisions have vcollision ∼ vesc 

within a factor of ∼ 2, indicating that many collisions are imperfect mergers and thus may eject material (M. Goldberg & K. Batygin 2022). In contrast, we find that Q < Q ∗ 

> D

for 99% of collisions, and therefore we expect fragmentation to be negligible in our simula-tions. We thus find that the assumption of perfect in-elastic mergers is reasonable. Collisions with Q > Q ∗

> D

or vcollision ≫ vesc generally occur when the impact an-gle is high ( θ ≳ 90 deg), since in this case, the relative velocity between the colliding bodies is large. 4.2. Application to observed systems 

To understand the energy minimization hypothesis in the context of observed systems, we plot the mass dis-parity δ vs. the pair mass mpair for observed systems from the NASA Exoplanet Archive (R. L. Akeson et al. 2013) in Figure 12. For planets without a radius (mass) measurement, we infer the radius (mass) from the prob-abilistic mass-radius relation Forecaster (J. Chen & D. Kipping 2017). We find that the trend from Figure 8 is also present among observed systems, with the mass dis-parity δ growing as a function of mpair for mpair > m crit .           

> Figure 12. Same as Figure 8, but for observed exoplanet systems. Again, for m1+m2> m crit , the mass disparity increases. The vertical dotted line indicates the optimal cut-off determined by our t-test procedure, m1+m2= 2 .6mcrit .The horizontal lines and thin gray shaded regions surround-ing them indicate the mean and standard error of the mass disparity for the low-mass and high-mass subsamples at the optimal cutoff.

A two-sample t-test of the distribution of mass dis-parities between planet pairs with mpair > m crit and 

mpair < m crit yields a p-value of 5 .6 × 10 −6. Thus, we conclude that observed planet pairs with mpair > m crit 

are generally less uniform than those with mpair < m crit .Through the same ensemble of t-tests carried out for the synthetic data, we find that the optimal pair-mass ratio for observed planet pairs is κ = 2 .6. Additionally, we repeat this analysis using the mass-radius relation-ship provided by S. M¨ uller et al. (2024) and find an opti-mal pair-mass ratio κ = 2 .2. Furthermore, we carry out a suite of permutation tests analogous to those described in Sec 3.2 and find overall agreement. These values are markedly lower than the value obtained from the anal-ysis of the synthetic systems, and may be indicative of additional astrophysical mechanisms responsible for en-ergy dissipation among planet pairs, such as migration and eccentricity damping due to interactions with the protoplanetary disk, and pebble accretion. At the optimal cutoff κ = 2 .6, the mean mass disparity of the low-mass sample is 0 .341 ± 0.013 and the mean mass disparity of the high-mass sample is 0 .458 ± 0.024. This amounts to a difference of ∼ 4 standard errors, which is still statistically robust, but the signal to noise ratio is smaller than for the synthetic data.  

> 5.

CONCLUSION The transition from intra-system mass uniformity to non-uniformity for systems with multiple planets is a 10 key problem in understanding the formation and dy-namics of planetary systems. In this paper, we carried out a suite of N -body integrations to evaluate the en-ergy minimization hypothesis for planet formation (from A20), namely, that the observed trends in uniformity are a result of nearly uniform configurations being the low-est energy state accessible to forming planetary pairs. Our numerical results show that planet pairs above the critical mass threshold derived in A20 tend to favor less uniform configurations and we confirmed that this trend is present in the sample of observed exoplanets. We also found that in our simulations, energy dissipation occurs rapidly, but only while mergers are common. Af-ter ∼ 10 kyr, systems become approximately Hill stable and mergers become rare. As a result, the global energy minimum state is not always reached. This finding indi-cates a more complicated picture: planet pairs below the threshold mass are energetically favored to have nearly equal masses and generally reach that state. When the pair mass is just above threshold, the pairs start to fa-vor unequal masses, but the full realization of runaway growth (where one planet dominates the mass budget) does not occur until a mass scale ∼ 4 times above the threshold mass of A20. For comparison, the critical mass threshold favored by the population of observed planet pairs is ∼ 2 − 3 larger than that of the analytical thresh-old. While this paper provides numerical evidence for en-ergy optimization’s role in planet formation, a great deal of additional work should be carried out. One com-pelling direction for future analytical work is to modify the argument of A20 to account for incomplete energy minimization. Future N -body studies could improve our model by accounting for fragmentation in high-energy collisions, self-consistently modeling the radius evolu-tion of the planetary embryos and planets over time, and additional channels for energy dissipation, such as inter-actions with the protoplanetary disk and pebble accre-tion. In addition, it would be interesting to repeat our numerical simulations with lighter embryos ≲ 0.01 M⊕

to determine how well the reported trends persist. Acknowledgments We thank the anonymous reviewer for comments that have substantially improved our manuscript. We thank Fei Dai for helpful suggestions. This material is based on work supported by the National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship Program. The authors acknowledge the MIT Office of Research Computing and Data and the MIT Engaging Cluster for providing com-putational resources that contributed to the results re-ported in this paper. FCA is also supported by NSF Grant No. 2508843, and by the Leinweber Institute for Theoretical Physics at the University of Michigan. This research made use of the NASA Exoplanet Archive, which is operated by the California Institute of Technol-ogy, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under the Exoplanet Exploration Program. REFERENCES 

> Adams, F. C. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 488, 1446 Adams, F. C., Batygin, K., Bloch, A. M., & Laughlin, G. 2020, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 493, 5520 Akeson, R. L., Chen, X., Ciardi, D., et al. 2013, PASP, 125, 989, doi: 10.1086/672273 Armitage, P. J. 2020, Astrophysics of planet formation (Cambridge University Press) Bitsch, B., Lambrechts, M., & Johansen, A. 2015, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 582, A112 Chambers, J., & Wetherill, G. 1998, Icarus, 136, 304 Chen, J., & Kipping, D. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal, 834, 17 Duffell, P. C., & Chiang, E. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 812, 94 Edgington, E., & Onghena, P. 2007, Randomization tests (CRC press) Emsenhuber, A., Mordasini, C., & Burn, R. 2023, The European Physical Journal Plus, 138, 181 Fang, J., & Margot, J.-L. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 761, 92 Ghosh, T., & Chatterjee, S. 2024, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 527, 79 Gladman, B. 1993, Icarus, 106, 247 Goldberg, M., & Batygin, K. 2022, The Astronomical Journal, 163, 201 Hartmann, L. 2008, Physica Scripta, 2008, 014012 He, M. Y., & Ford, E. B. 2022, The Astronomical Journal, 164, 210 He, M. Y., Ford, E. B., & Ragozzine, D. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 490, 4575 Kominami, J., & Ida, S. 2002, Icarus, 157, 43 Lambrechts, M., Johansen, A., & Morbidelli, A. 2014, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 572, A35

11 

Lammers, C., Hadden, S., & Murray, N. 2023, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, 525, L66 Leinhardt, Z. M., & Stewart, S. T. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 745, 79 Lissauer, J. J., Ragozzine, D., Fabrycky, D. C., et al. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 197, 8 Lu, T., Hernandez, D. M., & Rein, H. 2024, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 533, 3708 Mann, R. K., & Williams, J. P. 2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 694, L36 Millholland, S., Wang, S., & Laughlin, G. 2017, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 849, L33 Mishra, L., Alibert, Y., Leleu, A., et al. 2021, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 656, A74 Morbidelli, A., Lambrechts, M., Jacobson, S., & Bitsch, B. 2015, Icarus, 258, 418 M¨ uller, S., Baron, J., Helled, R., Bouchy, F., & Parc, L. 2024, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 686, A296 Murchikova, L., & Tremaine, S. 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 160, 160 Pascucci, I., Testi, L., Herczeg, G. J., et al. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 831, 125 Rein, H., & Liu, S.-F. 2012, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 537, A128 Rein, H., & Spiegel, D. S. 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 446, 1424 Rein, H., & Tamayo, D. 2015, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 452, 376 Smith, A. W., & Lissauer, J. J. 2009, Icarus, 201, 381 Stewart, S. T., & Leinhardt, Z. M. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 751, 32 Tamayo, D., Cranmer, M., Hadden, S., et al. 2020, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 117, 18194 Thadhani, E., Ba, Y., Rein, H., & Tamayo, D. 2025, Research Notes of the AAS, 9, 27 Tremaine, S. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 807, 157 Wang, S. 2017, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 1, 26 Weiss, L., Millholland, S., Petigura, E., et al. 2023, Protostars and Planets VII, 534, 863 Weiss, L. M., & Petigura, E. A. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 893, L1 Weiss, L. M., Marcy, G. W., Petigura, E. A., et al. 2018a, The Astronomical Journal, 155, 48 Weiss, L. M., Isaacson, H. T., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2018b, The Astronomical Journal, 156, 254 Williams, J. P., & McPartland, C. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 830, 32 Wilson, E. B. 1927, Journal of the American Statistical Association, 22, 209 Winn, J. N., & Fabrycky, D. C. 2015, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 53, 409 Yzer, M., Brasser, R., & Ten Kate, I. L. 2025, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 698, A307