Title: The dust-rich, gas-depleted protosolar disk as the birthplace of chondrules

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.16204v1

Published Time: Tue, 18 Aug 2026 01:42:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
> Draft version August 18, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

The dust-rich, gas-depleted protosolar disk as the birthplace of chondrules 

Sota Arakawa ,1, ∗ Hidekazu Tanaka ,2, ∗ Toshihiko Kadono ,3 Takayuki Ushikubo ,4, 5 

Makiko Nagasawa ,6 and Hiroshi Kobayashi 7

> 1Center for Mathematical Science and Advanced Technology, REIS, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology, Yokohama, 236-0001, Japan
> 2Astronomical Institute, Tohoku University, Sendai, 980-8578, Japan
> 3Department of Basic Sciences, University of Occupational and Environmental Health, Kitakyushu, 807-8555, Japan
> 4Kochi Institute for Core Sample Research, EMS, Japan Agency for Marine-Earth Science and Technology, Nankoku, 783-8502, Japan
> 5Marine Core Research Institute, Kochi University, Nankoku, 783-8502, Japan
> 6Department of Physics, School of Medicine, Kurume University, Kurume, 830-0011, Japan
> 7Department of Physics, Nagoya University, Nagoya, 464-8602, Japan

ABSTRACT Chondrules are the primary components of primitive meteorites known as chondrites, and under-standing their formation and accumulation is essential for elucidating the history of planet formation in the Solar System. Although a variety of chondrule formation mechanisms have been proposed, it remains challenging to satisfy the key constraints on chondrule abundance, formation timing, and min-eralogical and chemical characteristics within a single model. In particular, the planetesimal bow-shock model, once considered one of the leading candidates, now faces a fundamental difficulty: Jupiter’s formation likely depleted gas in the protosolar disk, potentially lowering the gas density below that required for efficient chondrule formation by planetesimal bow shocks. Here we propose an alternative mechanism that can occur in a gas-depleted environment: heavy bombardment of eccentric planetesi-mals by debris dust. After Jupiter formed in the protosolar disk, the region interior to its orbit became gas-depleted, leading to the formation of a geometrically thin debris-dust layer. When planetesimals enter the dust layer at high speed, large quantities of molten silicate droplets are produced. These droplets cool and solidify into chondrules and are reincorporated into the dust layer. Using analytical calculations, we find that our model can potentially explain the abundance, formation timing, and mineralogical and chemical characteristics of chondrules. This study links the formation of Jupiter and the accompanying evolution of the protosolar disk to the origin of terrestrial planets, asteroids, and meteorites, thereby offering a new framework for the formation of the Solar System. 

Keywords: Chondrules (229) — Debris disks (363) — Planetesimals (1259) — Protoplanetary disks (1300) — Solar system (1528) 

1. INTRODUCTION Chondrules are 0.1–1-mm-sized spherical igneous grains. The volume fraction of chondrules in ordinary chondrites is ∼ 60–80% (e.g., E. R. D. Scott 2007). Most chondrules in ordinary chondrites formed at ∼ 2 Myr after Ca–Al-rich inclusions (CAIs), which are the first condensates in the solar protoplanetary disk, within a relatively short interval of less than 1 Myr (e.g., G. Siron et al. 2021, 2022). There is broad consensus that some chondrules experienced multiple heating events, as ev-idenced by their petrological and isotopic characteris-tics (e.g., A. Ruzicka et al. 2007; T. J. Tenner et al.  

> Email: arakawas@jamstec.go.jp
> ∗These authors contributed equally to this work.

2018; E. van Kooten et al. 2021; Y. Marrocchi et al. 2024a). Their igneous textures indicate rapid crystal-lization from a molten state, with inferred timescales of seconds to hours (e.g., R. H. Jones et al. 2018; H. Miura et al. 2025). The abundances of volatile elements and the redox state of chondrule olivines suggest that chondrules formed in highly dust-enriched environments (e.g., C. M. O. D. Alexander et al. 2008; T. J. Tenner et al. 2018). Taken together, these observations suggest that chondrules formed through localized, high-energy events in the early Solar System. A variety of chondrule formation mechanisms have been proposed to date (e.g., E. Asphaug et al. 2011; A. C. Boley et al. 2013; B. C. Johnson et al. 2015; H. Kaneko et al. 2023; S.-i. Sirono & D. Turrini 2025; S. T. Stewart et al. 2025). However, it remains challenging to satisfy the key constraints on arXiv:2608.16204v1 [astro-ph.EP] 17 Aug 2026 2chondrule abundance, formation timing, and mineralog-ical and chemical characteristics within a single model. Planetesimals with large orbital eccentricities, excited by gravitational perturbations from the giant planets (Jupiter and Saturn), have been regarded as promis-ing sources of high-energy events capable of producing large amounts of molten rock (e.g., S. J. Weidenschilling et al. 1998). Mean-motion resonances with Jupiter can excite the eccentricities of planetesimals in the vicin-ity of the asteroid belt ( ∼ 2–3 au from the Sun), and the resulting random velocities can reach ∼ 5–10 km/s (e.g., S. J. Weidenschilling et al. 1998; F. Marzari & S. Weidenschilling 2002; M. Nagasawa et al. 2014, 2019). Under the ideal assumption that kinetic energy is con-verted into heat with 100% efficiency, the instantaneous deceleration of rocky grains by ∼ 2 km/s near a plan-etesimal would be sufficient to raise their temperatures by more than 1000 K and melt them. In addition, the cooling timescale of molten rocky grains is expected to be short (seconds to minutes), because the spatial scale of the heating event is comparable to the planetesimal radius. Therefore, eccentric planetesimals in the so-lar protoplanetary disk have the potential to produce chondrule-like igneous objects. Chondrule formation mechanisms involving eccentric planetesimals have mainly been discussed in terms of two types of models: planetesimal bow shocks (e.g., A. C. Boley et al. 2013) and planetesimal collisions (e.g., E. Asphaug et al. 2011; B. C. Johnson et al. 2015). In the planetesimal bow-shock model, planetesimals on high-eccentricity orbits move supersonically through the gas of the solar protoplanetary disk, generating bow shocks, and chondrule precursors that are dynamically coupled to the disk gas are melted in the post-shock region. Gas drag in the post-shock region must be sufficiently strong for chondrules to form, and radiative hydrodynamic sim-ulations have shown that, for planetesimals with radii smaller than 1000 km, a disk gas density of at least 10 −9 g cm −3 is required (e.g., F. J. Ciesla et al. 2004; L. L. Hood et al. 2005). However, the gas density re-quired by this model is more than an order of magnitude higher than that at 2–3 au in the minimum-mass solar nebula (S. J. Weidenschilling 1977; C. Hayashi 1981), and such a gas density cannot be achieved unless an ex-ceptionally massive disk is assumed (e.g., S. J. Desch 2007). Moreover, the presence of Jupiter is necessary to excite planetesimals onto high-eccentricity orbits, but once gas accretion onto proto-Jupiter is taken into ac-count, the gas density at 2–3 au can become one or two orders of magnitude lower than it would be in the ab-sence of Jupiter (e.g., T. Tanigawa & H. Tanaka 2016; H. Tanaka et al. 2020). The gas in the region interior to Jupiter’s orbit could become almost completely depleted when gas dispersal by disk winds is taken into account (e.g., M. Kunitomo et al. 2020). In summary, in the solar protoplanetary disk after Jupiter’s formation, planetes-imal bow shocks are unlikely to have served as a major chondrule-forming mechanism. Planetesimal collision models have been intensively in-vestigated in recent years, and several scenarios that differ in pre-impact thermal state and composition have been proposed (e.g., I. S. Sanders & E. R. D. Scott 2012; C. P. Dullemond et al. 2014; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2018; M. D. Cashion et al. 2022; S.-i. Sirono & D. Turrini 2025; S. T. Stewart et al. 2025). The most important difficulty with the planetesimal collision model is that it cannot readily account for chondrules that experienced multiple heating events (e.g., A. Ruzicka et al. 2008). In this scenario, molten rocky grains produced by plan-etesimal collisions are dispersed into the disk and then solidify (e.g., N. Choksi et al. 2021), but each grain is expected to record only a single heating event. This contrasts with bow-shock models, in which chondrules can, in principle, undergo multiple heating events while orbiting within the disk. It should be noted that not all chondrules preserve evidence for multiple heating events. Thus, we do not rule out the possibility that some chondrules formed through planetesimal collisions. Indeed, chondrules in CB and CH carbonaceous chon-drites are widely considered to have formed in impact-generated gas–melt plumes produced by planetesimal collisions (e.g., A. N. Krot et al. 2022). It is reasonable to assume that multiple chondrule-forming mechanisms may have operated in the early So-lar System. In this study, we propose an additional plausible chondrule formation mechanism that is dis-tinct from planetesimal collisions and is particularly rel-evant to chondrules in ordinary chondrites. In Section 2, we provide an overview of our scenario. We then assess the viability of the proposed scenario through order-of-magnitude calculations of the chondrule production rate in Section 3. We also evaluate whether the proposed scenario can satisfy the thermal conditions required for producing molten chondrules in Section 4. The chrono-logical aspects of chondrule formation are discussed in Section 5. This study offers new insights into chondrule formation and its connection to the evolution of the pro-tosolar disk.  

> 2.

OVERVIEW Geometrically thin, dusty, and gas-depleted circum-stellar disks, known as debris disks, are frequently ob-served around young stars (e.g., A. M. Hughes et al. 2018). We note that debris disks are not necessarily cold, distant disks located at several tens to hundreds of au from their host stars. A large number of warm debris disks with dust temperatures of ≳ 150 K have been iden-tified (e.g., T. Mizuki et al. 2024), and debris-disk candi-dates have also been reported around stars as young as a few Myr old (e.g., J. M. Carpenter et al. 2009; T. Currie & S. J. Kenyon 2009). In this study, we propose a mech-anism in which eccentric planetesimals penetrate a dusty disk at velocities of several km/s and experience intense 3heating due to heavy bombardment by debris dust. This process is expected to be inevitable and ubiquitous after Jupiter’s formation, when most of the gas in the inner protosolar disk had dissipated. The kinetic energy of the colliding dust particles can efficiently heat planetesimal surfaces, producing molten rocky ejecta that solidify into chondrules. This model can also account for other key constraints on chondrule formation, including repeated heating events in a dust-enriched environment (e.g., A. Ruzicka et al. 2007; C. M. O. D. Alexander et al. 2008; T. J. Tenner et al. 2018). Figure 1 schematically illustrates the evolution of the inner protosolar disk interior to Jupiter’s orbit after the formation of proto-Jupiter. Astronomical observa-tions of extrasolar protoplanetary disks have revealed the presence of 0.1–1 mm-sized dust particles in the disk midplane (e.g., S. M. Andrews 2020). Some disks with ages of a few Myr host planets (e.g., S. Y. Haffert et al. 2019; M. G. Barber et al. 2024), implying that plan-etesimals must also have formed on similar timescales. Nucleosynthetic anomalies in meteorites exhibit a clear dichotomy (e.g., P. H. Warren 2011; T. Yokoyama et al. 2019; T. Kleine et al. 2020), which may have been caused by a gap in the gaseous protoplanetary disk carved by proto-Jupiter (e.g., T. S. Kruijer et al. 2017). Proto-Jupiter acquired its current mass by accreting gas from the protoplanetary disk. This accretion reduces the gas flow across Jupiter’s orbit, leading to depletion of disk gas near and interior to Jupiter’s orbit (e.g., T. Tanigawa & H. Tanaka 2016; H. Tanaka et al. 2020). Disk winds driven by photoevaporation and magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) processes further enhance this depletion (e.g., B. Ercolano & I. Pascucci 2017; M. Kunitomo et al. 2020). The resulting gas depletion could increase the dust-to-gas mass ratio and thereby promote additional planetesimal formation (e.g., D. Carrera et al. 2017), ul-timately leading to the formation of an inner debris disk populated by planetesimals after gas dispersal. The de-bris present before chondrule formation could have origi-nated from both (i) fragments produced by planetesimal collisions and (ii) dust aggregates that grew in the pro-tosolar disk. Refractory condensates formed in the pro-tosolar disk, such as CAIs, would also have been present as part of this primordial debris. 2.1. Energetics of the Debris-dust Layer 

Here, we estimate the geometry of the gas-free debris-dust layer based on energetic considerations. The thick-ness of the layer, Hd, is determined by the random ve-locity of dust particles, vd, as Hd ∼ vd/ΩK, where Ω K

is the Keplerian angular velocity. We define the dust surface density at heliocentric distance r as Σ d, and the vertically averaged dust density is then given by 

ρd = Σ d/H d.Mutual collisions between dust particles dissipate ki-netic energy and reduce vd. Assuming that the typical radius and material density of dust particles are Rd =   

> Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the inner protosolar disk evolution interior to Jupiter’s orbit after the formation of proto-Jupiter. Proto-Jupiter and planetesimals formed within the gaseous disk. Gas accretion onto proto-Jupiter re-duces the gas flow across Jupiter’s orbit, causing depletion of disk gas near and interior to the orbit. Disk winds driven by photoevaporation and MHD processes further promote this depletion. Depletion of disk gas could promote additional planetesimal formation, leading to the formation of an inner debris disk populated by planetesimals after gas dispersal.

0.1 mm and ρm = 3 g cm −3, respectively, the mass of a single dust particle is md = (4 π/ 3) ρmRd3 = 1 × 10 −5 g. Its geometric cross section is Ad = πR d2 = 3 ×10 −4 cm 2.The collision frequency of a dust particle, fd, is esti-mated as fd ∼ ρdvdAd/m d ∼ (Σ dΩK)/(ρmRd). In contrast, collisions between dust particles and ec-centric planetesimals inject kinetic energy into the de-bris disk. Here, we consider the motion of an eccen-tric planetesimal in a frame co-rotating with the de-bris disk at heliocentric distance r. We denote the sur-face density of eccentric planetesimals by Σ pl and their random velocity relative to Keplerian motion by vpl .When a planetesimal’s orbit is perturbed by Jupiter, its orbital inclination ipl is generally smaller than its eccentricity epl (e.g., F. Marzari & S. Weidenschilling 2002), and thus we approximate vpl ∼ epl vK, where 

vK = rΩK = 30 ( r/ 1 au) −1/2 km s −1 is the Keplerian velocity. Assuming that the internal density of planetes-imals is equal to ρm, the mass of a single planetesimal is mpl = (4 π/ 3) ρmRpl 3, where Rpl denotes the typical radius of planetesimals. When ipl ≫ Hd/r , the orbital plane of a planetesimal no longer lies entirely within the debris-dust layer. In this case, the planetesimal passes through a volume V ≈ πR pl 2Lcross of the debris-dust layer per orbit, where Lcross ∼ Hd×epl /i pl is the crossing length. The collision frequency of a dust particle with 4eccentric planetesimals, fpl , is then estimated as fpl ∼

(V Σpl ΩK)/(Hdmpl ) ∼ (Σ pl ΩK)/(ρmRpl ) × (epl /i pl ). We adopt fiducial parameters of r = 2 au, Rpl = 5 km, 

epl = 0 .25, ipl = 0 .025 rad, Σ d = 10 g cm −2, and Σpl = 1 g cm −2. Under these conditions, the heating timescale of the debris-dust layer by eccentric planetes-imals is 

τpl = fpl −1 ∼ 1 × 10 −1 Myr , (1) and the random velocity of the planetesimals is vpl ∼

5 km s −1 (see Appendix A). As mutual collisions between dust particles are in-elastic, the energy dissipated per collision is e− ≈

(1 /2) mdvd2. Similarly, the energy gained by a sin-gle dust particle per collision with a planetesimal is 

e+ ≈ (1 /2) mdvpl 2. By solving the energy balance equa-tion, fde− = fpl e+, we obtain the equilibrium value of 

vd in the debris disk: vd ∼ (Σ pl Rdepl /ΣdRpl ipl )1/2vpl ∼

7 × 10 −1 m s −1. The thickness and density of the debris disk, Hd and ρd, are then given by 

Hd ∼ vd

ΩK

∼ 1 × 10 4 km , (2) 

ρd ∼ Σd

Hd

∼ 1 × 10 −8 g cm −3. (3) In this estimate, we assume that the mass flux of de-bris dust impacting a planetesimal is comparable to that of debris dust ejected by collisions, and we neglect the temporal evolution of Σ d and Σ pl . The validity of this assumption is examined later (see Section 3). We also briefly discuss the long-term evolution of a planetesimal-hosting debris disk. Eccentric planetesi-mals at around 2–3 au gradually migrate inward through their interaction with the debris disk (e.g., M. Nagasawa et al. 2019), leading to a decrease in Σ pl over time. Ac-cording to Equation (3), the depletion of eccentric plan-etesimals results in an increase in ρd, and once ρd reaches the Roche density, ρR ≈ 5 × 10 −8 (r/ 2 au) −3 g cm −3

(e.g., A. N. Youdin & F. H. Shu 2002), part of the de-bris dust collapses into planetesimals via gravitational instability (e.g., E. Chiang & A. N. Youdin 2010). This process works as a buffer that maintains ρd below ρR,and the formation of chondrite parent bodies may also be associated with this mechanism. Additionally, the ac-cumulation of inward-migrating planetesimals near 1 au may provide favorable conditions for the formation of the Solar System’s terrestrial planets from a narrow planetesimal ring (e.g., B. M. S. Hansen 2009; K. J. Walsh & H. F. Levison 2016). 2.2. Chondrule Formation via Heavy Bombardment of Planetesimals by Debris Dust 

As discussed above, a situation in which high-speed eccentric planetesimals penetrate a geometrically thin debris disk is expected to arise after gas in the inner region of the solar protoplanetary disk has dispersed.       

> Figure 2. Schematic illustration of the heavy bombard-ment of a planetesimal by debris dust and the formation of a dense dust cloud. (1) Within the debris-dust layer, a fraction of the debris particles directly collide with the planetesimal surface. (2) These impacts generate primary ejecta around the planetesimal. (3) Another fraction of the incoming de-bris collides with the primary ejecta before reaching the sur-face, producing secondary particles that form a dense dust cloud. (4) Some of the incoming debris also collides with the secondary particles within this dense cloud, generating additional secondary particles. (5) Some of the dust-cloud particles eventually fall back onto the planetesimal surface, whereas a fraction escapes laterally from the vicinity of the planetesimal and ultimately forms chondrules. (6) Impacts of fallback cloud particles onto the planetesimal surface also generate primary ejecta.

Here, we schematically illustrate the heavy bombard-ment of planetesimals by debris dust, which leads to the formation of a dense dust cloud around the plan-etesimals and to chondrule production through multiple collisions (see Figure 2). Once an eccentric planetesimal enters the debris-dust layer, a fraction of the debris particles directly collide with the planetesimal surface. These impacts gener-ate primary ejecta around the planetesimal, while an-other fraction of the incoming debris collides with the primary ejecta before reaching the surface. Collisions between the primary ejecta and the incoming debris gen-erate secondary particles, which form a dense dust cloud surrounding the planetesimal. Some of the incoming de-bris also collides with the secondary particles within the cloud, producing additional secondary particles. These collisional processes are highly energetic, and the parti-cles in the dust cloud are expected to be molten. Some of the dust-cloud particles eventually fall back onto the planetesimal surface, forming a melt ocean, whereas a fraction escapes laterally from the vicinity of the plan-etesimal. These escaping particles gradually cool and so-5lidify after passing the planetesimal, ultimately becom-ing chondrules. The fallback of cloud particles onto the planetesimal surface regenerates primary ejecta, which are subsequently converted into cloud particles. In our scenario, the debris initially present in the disk is assumed to originate from two sources: (i) fragments produced by planetesimal collisions and (ii) dust aggre-gates that grew in the protosolar disk. Refractory con-densates formed in the protosolar disk, such as CAIs, would also have been present as part of this primordial debris. As chondrule formation proceeds, a substantial fraction of the dust component in the debris disk would be progressively replaced by (iii) chondrules leaking from dust clouds. The subsequent gravitational instability of the chondrule-hosting debris disk would then lead to the formation of chondritic planetesimals. This scenario may qualitatively explain the existence of chondrules that experienced multiple heating events, as recorded by relict grains and chondrule fragments en-closed in chondrules (e.g., Y. Marrocchi et al. 2024a). Particles leaking from the dust cloud become chondrules and are supplied to the debris disk. Some of these chon-drules floating within the debris disk may then be rein-jected into dust clouds surrounding eccentric planetes-imals. During this process, some of the injected chon-drules do not reach the molten planetesimal surface, but instead collide with primary ejecta or cloud particles and become incorporated into the dust cloud. Some of these chondrules may avoid complete melting, allowing relict grains or chondrule fragments to survive. Such relict grains and chondrule fragments could remain in the dust cloud and later merge with other chondrules, thereby forming chondrules that preserve evidence of multiple heating events (e.g., A. Ruzicka et al. 2008). Another possible line of evidence for chondrule recy-cling is the size dependence of oxygen isotopic composi-tions among chondrules in ordinary chondrites (e.g., Y. Marrocchi et al. 2024b). Specifically, small chondrules with diameters of ≲ 0.3 mm tend to be more 16 O-rich than larger chondrules. Although the origin of this size dependence remains debated (e.g., S. Hanai et al. 2025), one possible explanation is that these small chondrules formed earlier and subsequently served as precursors to larger chondrules through reprocessing in a relatively 

> 16

O-poor environment (e.g., Y. Marrocchi et al. 2024b). If the initial dust components and planetesimals in the debris disk had distinct oxygen isotopic compositions, the temporal evolution of the oxygen isotopic compo-sition of the chondrule-forming environment could be explained within the framework of the chondrule recy-cling hypothesis. This possibility should be investigated quantitatively in future studies.  

> 3.

CHONDRULE PRODUCTION RATE To assess the viability of the proposed chondrule formation mechanism, namely heavy bombardment of planetesimals by debris dust, we perform a concep- 

> Figure 3. Schematic of a planetesimal and its surrounding dust cloud embedded in the debris disk. For simplicity, the planetesimal is assumed to be cylindrical, and the structure of the dust cloud is shown in a side view. We consider three species of dust particles: incoming debris-disk particles ( in ,gray circles), primary ejecta ( ej , large orange circles), and secondary cloud particles ( cl , red circles). A fraction of the secondary cloud particles escapes laterally from the vicin-ity of the planetesimal and eventually becomes chondrules (cross-hatched green circles).

tual simulation of the temporal evolution of the dense dust cloud surrounding a planetesimal. We present a schematic illustration of a planetesimal and its sur-rounding dust cloud embedded in the debris disk in Fig-ure 3. For simplicity, the planetesimal is assumed to be cylindrical, and the structure of the dust cloud is shown in side view. The thickness of the dust cloud is denoted by hcl . We assume that the radius of the dust cloud, Rcl ,is given by Rcl = Rpl + hcl . The path length of a plan-etesimal through the debris disk during a single crossing is denoted by Lcross , and its residence time within the disk is tcross = Lcross /v pl . In this study, we consider only the rocky component and neglect the presence of ice (see Appendix B). We consider three species of dust particles: incom-ing debris-disk particles ( in ), primary ejecta ( ej ), and secondary cloud particles ( cl ). The surface density of the primary ejecta, integrated along the direction of the planetesimal’s motion, is denoted by Σ ej , and that of the secondary cloud particles by Σ cl . Similarly, the mo-menta of the primary ejecta and the secondary cloud particles per unit area are denoted by pej and pcl , re-spectively. The mean velocity and density of the sec-ondary cloud particles are given by vcl = pcl /Σcl and 

ρcl = Σ cl /h cl , respectively. Similarly, the density of the 6primary ejecta is given by ρej = Σ ej /h cl . The cloud thickness hcl is determined by the collisional decelera-tion of the primary ejecta (see Appendix C). The temporal evolution of Σ cl and Σ ej is given by the following equations: ˙Σcl = ˙Σin →cl + ˙Σej →cl − ˙Σcl →ex , (4) ˙Σej = ˙Σin →ej + ˙Σcl →ej − ˙Σej →cl . (5) Here, ˙Σin →cl denotes the mass conversion rate from the 

in to the cl component, ˙Σej →cl denotes that from the ej 

to the cl component, and ˙Σcl →ex represents the removal rate of the cl component from the dust cloud system. Primary ejecta are generated when incoming disk par-ticles or fallback cloud particles impact the planetesi-mal surface. The corresponding mass conversion rates, ˙Σin →ej and ˙Σcl →ej , are calculated using the crater-ejecta scaling law (e.g., K. R. Housen & K. A. Holsapple 2011). The temporal evolution of pej and pcl is also given by similar equations: ˙pcl = ˙ pin →cl + ˙ pej →cl − ˙pcl →ex , (6) ˙pej = ˙ pin →ej + ˙ pcl →ej − ˙pej →cl . (7) The specific forms of the terms on the right-hand sides of these evolution equations are given in Appendix C. We also evaluate the chondrule production rate, ˙Mch ,using ˙Mch = ( Scl − Spl ) ˙Σcl →ex , (8) where Scl = πR cl 2 and Spl = πR pl 2 are the cross sections of the dust cloud and the planetesimal, respectively. Figures 4 a–4 c show the temporal evolution of the ve-locities ( vcl and vej ), surface densities (Σ cl and Σ ej ), and cloud thickness ( hcl ) during a single crossing of the de-bris disk by a planetesimal with Rpl = 5 km. Here, we set Lcross = 1 × 10 5 km, vpl = 5 km s −1, and ρd =1×10 −8 g cm −3. The residence time of the planetesimal in the debris disk is tcross = Lcross /v pl = 2 × 10 4 s, and the dust cloud surrounding the planetesimal disperses immediately after the planetesimal passes through the debris disk. We find that the dust cloud reaches its equi-librium structure within several tens of seconds after the planetesimal enters the debris disk. The temporal evolution of the densities ρcl and 

ρej is shown in Figure 4d. For this set of pa-rameters, the equilibrium densities are ρcl ∼ ρej ∼

10 −4 g cm −3. This value satisfies cosmochemical con-straints on the chondrule-forming environment, partic-ularly those based on volatile-element retention within chondrules (e.g., C. M. O. D. Alexander et al. 2008; A. V. Fedkin & L. Grossman 2013). The mass influx of debris dust into the dust-cloud system is given by ˙Min = Scl ρdvpl , and the chondrule production rate is denoted by ˙Mch . Here we define the conversion efficiency as ˙Mch / ˙Min , which is shown in Fig-ure 4 e. We find that the conversion efficiency reaches 

≈ 50% in the steady state at t ≫ 10 s. The steady-state structure of the dust-cloud system depends on parameters such as Rpl . Figure 4 f shows the equilibrium values of ρcl and ρej as a function of Rpl .For planetesimals with 1 km ≤ Rpl ≤ 20 km, both ρcl 

and ρej are approximately 10 −4 g cm −3 and are nearly independent of Rpl . This suggests that, in the debris-dust bombardment scenario, chondrule formation in a highly dust-enriched environment can be achieved over a wide range of Rpl . The dependence of the steady-state structure on other key parameters, such as the ejecta radius and the minimum ejecta velocity, is discussed in Appendices D and E. Finally, we show the steady-state conversion efficiency as a function of Rpl (Figure 4 g). For planetesimals with 3 km ≤ Rpl ≤ 20 km, ˙Mch / ˙Min is approximately inversely proportional to Rpl and ranges from 10% to 100%. This estimate is consistent with our hypothesis that a fraction of the incoming debris dust is deposited onto the planetesimal surface and forms a melt ocean. We also note that the conversion efficiency can exceed 100%, depending on the choice of Rpl . Indeed, in the present case, we find that ˙Mch / ˙Min > 1 for Rpl ≤ 2 km. When ˙Mch / ˙Min > 1, planetesimals may undergo net collisional erosion, thereby supplying mass to the debris disk. If planetesimals had differentiated into silicate and metal components, their collisional erosion could poten-tially produce dust clouds that are extremely depleted or enriched in metal. Such dust clouds would likely be inconsistent with the typical chemical compositions of chondrules in the Solar System, except possibly for non-porphyritic chondrules in CH and CB chondrites (e.g., A. N. Krot et al. 2002). However, simple thermal evo-lution calculations show that the peak temperature of planetesimals with Rpl ≲ 2 km does not reach 1500 K, irrespective of their accretion age (see Appendix F). Therefore, collisional erosion of differentiated planetes-imals is unlikely to play a major role in our chondrule formation model.  

> 4.

HEAT BALANCE ANALYSIS We also evaluate whether a melt ocean can be main-tained during a debris-disk crossing using a heat-balance analysis. Figure 5 a presents a schematic illustration of our heat-balance analysis around the planetesimal. Assuming that the photosphere of a planetesimal sur-rounded by a dust cloud is located at a height hcl above the surface (i.e., at a distance rcl from the planetesimal’s center), the radiative energy efflux, Frad , is given by 

Frad ∼ 4Scl σSB Tcl 4, (9) where Tcl denotes the temperature at the cloud photo-sphere. For simplicity, we assume that the dust cloud envelops the entire planetesimal. The high-speed incom-ing debris dust delivers kinetic energy to the dust cloud, 7                                 

> Figure 4. a–e: Temporal evolution of the dust-cloud system for Rpl = 5 km. a:vcl (red solid line) and vej (orange dashed line). b:Σcl (red solid line) and Σ ej (orange dashed line). c:hcl .d:ρcl (red solid line) and ρej (orange dashed line). e:˙Mch /˙Min .fand g: Dependence on Rpl .f: Steady-state values of ρcl (red circles) and ρej (orange squares). g: Steady-state values of ˙Mch /˙Min .

and the corresponding energy influx, Fin , is 

Fin ≈ 12 Scl ρdvpl 3. (10) Cloud particles that leak out and subsequently become chondrules remove thermal energy from the dust cloud. The corresponding energy consumption rate, Qch , is given by 

Qch ≈ ˙Mch cheat ∆T , (11) where cheat = 1000 J kg −1 K−1 is the specific heat ca-pacity of chondrules, and ∆ T is the temperature differ-ence between the escaping chondrules and the incoming debris dust. Assuming a background temperature of the debris disk of ≲ 500 K and a dust-cloud temperature suitable for chondrule formation of ∼ 1500 K, we esti-mate ∆ T ∼ 1000 K. In addition, thermal energy may be consumed at the planetesimal surface to sustain the melt ocean; we denote the corresponding energy consumption rate by Qpl .We evaluate the optical depth of the dust cloud, τcl .Here, we neglect the contribution of the primary ejecta to the optical depth of the dust-cloud system, because the primary ejecta are assumed to have larger grain sizes than the cloud particles and thus lower opacity. As the cloud particles are submillimeter-sized grains, their opacity is assumed to follow the geometrical optics ap-proximation. The cross section of the cloud particles per unit mass, κcl , is given by κcl ≈ Acl /m cl ≈ 25 cm 2 g−1.The optical depth is then given by τcl ≈ κcl Σcl ≈

10  Σcl /0.4 g cm −2. Our estimate of τcl indicates that the dust cloud surrounding the planetesimal is indeed optically thick under our fiducial conditions (see Fig-ure 4 b). The temperature at the base of the dust cloud is expected to be comparable to that of the planetesimal surface. If the planetesimal sustains a (partially molten) melt ocean, the corresponding temperature would be approximately 1500 K. The temperature at the photo-sphere of the dust cloud, Tcl , would be lower than that at the planetesimal surface, although its actual value depends on the details of heat transfer and kinetic pro-cesses within the dust cloud. For the following discus-sion, we adopt Tcl ≈ 1000 K. When the dust cloud is in a steady state, the heat-balance equation, Fin = Frad + Qch + Qpl , must be sat-isfied. To maintain a melt ocean on the planetesimal surface, Qpl > 0 is required. In addition, to produce 8          

> Figure 5. a:Schematic illustration of the heat balance around the planetesimal. The kinetic energy influx is de-noted by Fin , and the radiative energy efflux by Frad .The thermal energy consumption rate associated with chondrule formation is denoted by Qch , and that at the planetesimal surface by Qpl .b:Parameter space in the ( vpl , ρ d) plane that satisfies the conditions for maintaining a melt ocean on the planetesimal surface and producing a sufficient amount of chondrules (white region).

a sufficient amount of chondrules, ˙Mch should be com-parable to ˙Min = Scl ρdvpl . Under these conditions, we derive the requirement for Qpl > 0 as follows: 12 ρdvpl 3 ≳ 4σSB Tcl 4 + ρdvpl cheat ∆T . (12) The white region in Figure 5 b shows the parameter space that satisfies Inequality (12). We note that this heat-balance analysis is independent of the choice of Rpl .For vpl ≳ 2 km s −1, Inequality (12) can be rewritten as 

ρd ≳ 4 × 10 −9  vpl 

5 km s −1

−3

g cm −3. (13) The required condition on ( vpl , ρ d) can indeed be sat-isfied in a Solar System debris disk hosting eccentric planetesimals, as estimated from Equation (3). When considering the chondrule-forming environ-ment, it is necessary to take into account not only tem-perature but also pressure. Chondrules are thought to have formed in environments with substantially elevated partial pressures of silicate vapor (e.g., D. S. Ebel & L. Grossman 2000; G. Libourel et al. 2006; C. M. O. D. Alexander et al. 2008). Indeed, to melt silicate materi-als in the disk and form chondrules while avoiding sub-stantial sodium loss, it is desirable to have (i) silicate dust enrichment by a factor of ≳ 10 2 relative to solar composition and (ii) high pressures of order ∼ 10 2 Pa (e.g., D. S. Ebel & L. Grossman 2000). In our model, chondrule formation occurs in an H 2-gas-depleted, dust-rich environment, and therefore con-dition (i) is clearly satisfied. Here we further show that condition (ii) can also be satisfied. The temperature of the dust cloud is high enough to induce at least par-tial melting of silicate materials, and therefore silicate vapor is expected to be present within the cloud. The dust cloud is subject to ram pressure due to the influx of debris-disk particles, and we assume that the silicate vapor pressure is comparable to the ram pressure acting on the dust cloud. The ram pressure acting on the dust cloud, Pcl , can be estimated as 

Pcl ≈ 12 ρdvpl 2

∼ 100 

 ρd

1 × 10 −8 g cm −3

 vpl 

5 km s −1

2

Pa .(14) Thus, the dust cloud in our model can realize an envi-ronment with high silicate vapor pressure ( ∼ 10 2 Pa), favorable for chondrule formation.  

> 5.

CHRONOLOGY OF CHONDRULE FORMATION As discussed above, our proposed scenario—the high-velocity entry of eccentric planetesimals into a debris-dust disk—may provide a mechanism for producing chondrule-like igneous objects. In the early Solar Sys-tem, the formation of giant planets such as Jupiter would have increased the orbital eccentricities of plan-etesimals. Recent studies of the dichotomy in nu-cleosynthetic isotopic anomalies between inner- and outer-Solar-System materials have suggested that proto-Jupiter may have formed within ≲ 1 Myr after CAI for-mation (e.g., T. S. Kruijer et al. 2017), potentially al-tering the disk structure by opening a gap and thereby inhibiting the radial migration of dust particles. Planet-formation models that support such rapid proto-Jupiter formation have also been proposed. For example, H. Kobayashi & H. Tanaka (2021) showed that dust grains in the solar protoplanetary disk can grow to form the proto-Jupiter core on a timescale of several 10 5 years. Proto-Jupiter could then grow to its present mass on a 9timescale of 10 5–10 6 years through the accretion of disk gas (e.g., T. Tanigawa & H. Tanaka 2016). Such rapid formation of Jupiter may also be consistent with the inferred onset of chondrule formation based on recent high-precision 26 Al– 26 Mg dating of chondrules. We note, however, that the onset of chondrule formation remains under debate, as it depends on the assumption of the spatial homogeneity of 26 Al. If the short-lived ra-dionuclide 26 Al was spatially homogeneous throughout the solar protoplanetary disk, with an initial abundance of 26 Al /27 Al ≈ 5 × 10 −5 (e.g., S. J. Desch et al. 2023), chondrule formation in ordinary chondrites would have begun at ≈ 1.8 Myr after CAI formation (e.g., G. Siron et al. 2021). In contrast, if 26 Al was heterogeneously distributed (e.g., T. Iizuka et al. 2025), the inferred on-set age shifts to ≈ 0.4 Myr after CAI formation. These inferred onset ages are also consistent with the early formation of the proto-Jupiter core ( ≲ 1 Myr after CAI formation; e.g., T. S. Kruijer et al. 2017). The duration of chondrule formation has also been investigated using 26 Al– 26 Mg dating. Recent high-precision 26 Al– 26 Mg dating has enabled detailed dis-cussion of the duration of chondrule formation, show-ing that chondrules in many ordinary chondrites formed within a narrow time window of approximately 0 .4 Myr (e.g., G. Siron et al. 2021, 2022). In our scenario, the timescale over which the debris-dust layer is heated by eccentric planetesimals is τpl ∼ 10 5 yr (Equation (1)), which can account for chondrule formation within such a short interval.  

> 6.

SUMMARY In this study, we proposed a new chondrule forma-tion scenario in which eccentric planetesimals are heav-ily bombarded by debris dust in the gas-depleted inner protosolar disk (see Section 2). After the formation of proto-Jupiter, gas accretion onto proto-Jupiter and disk winds would have depleted the inner disk gas, leaving be-hind a geometrically thin, dust-rich debris layer. Plan-etesimals excited onto eccentric orbits repeatedly pen-etrate this dust-rich disk at velocities of several km/s, producing molten ejecta and dense dust clouds around the planetesimals through successive collisions with in-coming debris-disk particles. A fraction of the molten cloud particles escapes from the vicinity of the planetes-imals and solidifies into chondrules. Our dust-cloud model indicates that the cloud density could reach ∼ 10 −4 g cm −3 and that the silicate vapor pressure in the cloud could reach ∼ 10 2 Pa owing to the ram pressure exerted by incoming debris dust (see Sections 3 and 4, respectively). Our model thus pro-vides suitable conditions for chondrule formation (e.g., D. S. Ebel & L. Grossman 2000; G. Libourel et al. 2006; C. M. O. D. Alexander et al. 2008). The conversion effi-ciency from incoming debris dust to escaping chondrules ranges from about 10% to 100% for planetesimals with radii of a few to tens of kilometers (Section 3). The characteristic processing timescale of the debris layer is about 10 5 years, consistent with the short duration of chondrule formation inferred for ordinary chondrites (e.g., G. Siron et al. 2021, 2022) (see Section 5). Further-more, our model can explain the presence of chondrules that experienced multiple heating events prior to accre-tion into their parent bodies (e.g., A. Ruzicka et al. 2007; T. J. Tenner et al. 2018; E. van Kooten et al. 2021; Y. Marrocchi et al. 2024a). Our scenario therefore links Jupiter formation, inner-disk gas depletion, planetesimal excitation, and chon-drule formation within a single framework. In this pic-ture, chondrule formation naturally arises as a conse-quence of the evolution of the inner protosolar disk. The present study uses several order-of-magnitude estimates to evaluate the viability of this scenario, which should be tested with more detailed numerical simulations in future studies. Moreover, the outcomes of high-velocity collisions involving liquid silicates remain poorly under-stood, despite the key role of these collisions in our sce-nario. We therefore plan to investigate the underlying physical processes through laboratory experiments and to refine our dust-cloud model based on the experimen-tal results. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors thank Shota Sato and Dr. Alexander N. Krot for carefully reading the original manuscript and for providing helpful comments. SA was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grants JP24K17118, JP24KK0072, JP25K00025, and JP25H00678; TK by JP23K03483; TU by JP22K18741, JP24H00259, and JP25K07382; MN by JP21K03650; and HK by JP24K00690 and JP25K01055. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS HT and SA developed the idea for the study. SA per-formed the numerical simulations and prepared the orig-inal draft. All authors contributed to the interpretation of the results and to writing the paper. APPENDIX  

> A.

RANDOM VELOCITY OF THE PLANETESIMALS We set vpl = 5 km s −1 as the fiducial value, which is broadly consistent with the typical random velocity in the present-day asteroid belt (e.g., W. F. Bottke et al. 1994). M. Nagasawa et al. (2014, 2019) showed that, in the minimum-mass solar nebula (C. Hayashi 1981), 10 a planetesimal with Rpl ∼ 10 km initially located at 

r ∼ 4 au can reach vpl ∼ 5 km s −1 under Jupiter’s grav-itational perturbation. In our gas-depleted debris-disk model, weaker gas drag may allow even smaller planetes-imals to attain such large vpl values. However, because the surface density of the debris disk is lower than that of the minimum-mass solar nebula, eccentricity excitation by secular resonances may also be less effective (e.g., M. Nagasawa et al. 2019). Moreover, neither Jupiter’s mass nor the disk mass remains constant over time: Jupiter grows by accreting disk gas, while the disk mass de-creases over time. Future simulations of planetesimal orbital evolution that incorporate the evolution of both Jupiter’s mass and the disk surface density are essential for assessing the plausible vpl achievable in chondrule-forming environments.  

> B.

CHONDRULE FORMATION BEYOND THE SNOW LINE In this study, for simplicity, we consider only the rocky component and neglect the presence of ice. Therefore, although our current model may explain the origin of chondrules in ordinary and enstatite chondrites, it is presently difficult to account for the origin of chon-drules in carbonaceous chondrites. Chondrules in car-bonaceous chondrites are known to exhibit a correlation between redox state and oxygen isotopic composition, which is generally interpreted as reflecting the influence of ice in the chondrule-forming region (e.g., T. J. Tenner et al. 2018). Moreover, the fact that many carbona-ceous chondrites have experienced aqueous alteration (e.g., M. R. Lee et al. 2025) provides further evidence that ice was present in the chondrule-forming environ-ment of carbonaceous chondrites. If ice was present in the incoming debris dust, water vapor produced by its sublimation should also have been present in the dust cloud. Future work should incorporate the effects of wa-ter vapor and examine whether the origin of chondrules in carbonaceous chondrites can also be explained within our heavy-bombardment scenario. Assuming that 26 Al was spatially homogeneous throughout the solar protoplanetary disk and that its initial abundance was 26 Al /27 Al ≈ 5 × 10 −5 (e.g., S. J. Desch et al. 2023), chondrule formation in carbona-ceous chondrites other than Renazzo-type (CR) chon-drites would have begun at ≈ 2.2 Myr after CAI forma-tion and lasted for approximately 0 .6 Myr (K. Fukuda et al. 2022). This suggests that chondrules in carbona-ceous chondrites, which formed beyond the snow line, formed later than those in ordinary chondrites, which formed inside the snow line. By contrast, if gravita-tional perturbations from Jupiter excited the eccentrici-ties of planetesimals interior to Jupiter’s orbit, the heat-ing region associated with eccentric planetesimals may have migrated inward over time. This trend, however, is opposite to the inferred age trend of chondrule for-mation. This suggests that chondrules in carbonaceous chondrites may have formed exterior to Jupiter’s orbit. Saturn likely formed after Jupiter by accreting gas from the solar protoplanetary disk, and its growth prob-ably contributed to gas depletion beyond Jupiter’s or-bit. Following Saturn’s formation, gravitational pertur-bations from Jupiter and Saturn could have excited the eccentricities of planetesimals located between their or-bits. Under such conditions, heavy bombardment of planetesimals by debris dust may have occurred be-yond Jupiter’s orbit. Such a scenario may help explain the age difference between chondrules in carbonaceous and ordinary chondrites. Recent studies of the nucle-osynthetic isotope dichotomy between carbonaceous and non-carbonaceous chondrites have discussed similar sce-narios in which carbonaceous chondrites and their chon-drules formed exterior to Jupiter’s orbit (e.g., T. Kleine et al. 2020; T. S. Kruijer et al. 2017). Further discussion of the formation environment and mechanism of chon-drules in carbonaceous chondrites is therefore essential.  

> C.

GOVERNING EQUATIONS OF THE DUST-CLOUD SYSTEM We assume that the radius of the primary ejecta, Rej ,is sufficiently larger than that of the incoming debris dust, for which we adopt Rd = 0 .1 mm. For the fiducial case shown in Figure 4, we set Rej = 5 mm. We also examine the effect of Rej on the dust-cloud structure in Figure 6. Additionally, we assume that the radius of the cloud particles is equal to Rd, because cloud particles leaking from the dust cloud eventually become debris dust. In reality, cloud particles are likely to experience mul-tiple collisions within the dust cloud, and their size dis-tribution would be determined by the balance between collisional fragmentation and coalescence. The exis-tence of compound chondrules in chondrites is also evi-dence that multiple collisions occurred within the dust cloud (e.g., S. Arakawa & T. Nakamoto 2016; E. Jacquet 2021). In future work, it is necessary to address this is-sue by developing a model that takes into account the relative velocities among cloud particles. Similarly, pri-mary ejecta released from the planetesimal surface may undergo coalescence (or fragmentation) through mutual collisions before colliding with incoming debris dust or cloud particles (e.g., T. Kadono et al. 2015). This issue also remains to be investigated in future studies. The primary ejecta are eventually converted into cloud particles through momentum exchange during multiple collisions with incoming dust particles and cloud parti-cles. The stopping timescale of the primary ejecta, tstop ,is then given by 

tstop = mej (vcl − vej )

Aej 

h

ρd(vpl − vej )2 + ρcl (vcl − vej )2i , (C1) 11 where mej = (4 π/ 3) ρmRej 3 is the mass of an individual primary-ejecta particle, and Aej = πR ej 2 is its collisional cross section. The cloud thickness, hcl , is approximately given by 

hcl = |vej |tstop , (C2) where vej is the mean ejecta velocity. We define the positive velocity direction as that of the incoming debris dust; that is, vej is negative. A fraction of the incoming dust particles reaches the planetesimal’s surface, whereas the remainder is con-verted into cloud particles through collisions with pri-mary ejecta or cloud particles. The collision frequency of an incoming dust particle with primary ejecta is given by tej −1 = ρej Aej (vpl − vej )/m ej . Similarly, the collision frequency of an incoming dust particle with cloud par-ticles is given by tcl −1 = ρcl Acl (vpl − vcl )/m cl , where 

mcl = (4 π/ 3) ρmRd3 is the mass of a cloud particle, and 

Acl = πR d2 is its collisional cross section. The timescale for incoming dust particles to traverse the dust cloud is 

hcl /v pl . We then evaluate the fraction of incoming de-bris dust that reaches and collides with the planetesimal surface, fpl , as 

fpl = exp 



− hcl 

vpl 

 tej −1 + tcl −1

. (C3) At the planetesimal surface, colliding debris dust gen-erates primary ejecta. The ejecta particles are as-sumed to follow a power-law velocity distribution with a minimum ejecta velocity of vmin (e.g., K. R. Housen & K. A. Holsapple 2011). In this study, we adopt 

vmin = 10 m s −1 for the fiducial case shown in Fig-ure 4. We also examine the effect of larger vmin on the dust-cloud structure (see Figure 7). The mass flux ratio of ejecta to colliding debris dust, xin →ej , is calculated from the crater-ejecta scaling law (e.g., K. R. Housen & K. A. Holsapple 2011) as 

xin →ej =

 3k

4π

 vpl 

vmin 

3μ

, (C4) where k = 0 .39 and μ = 0 .55 are experimentally de-termined material constants for melt and rock (K. R. Housen & K. A. Holsapple 2011). The mean ejecta ve-locity, vej , is proportional to vmin and is given by 

vej = −

 3μ

3μ − 1



vmin . (C5) Similarly, fallback cloud particles colliding with the planetesimal surface generate primary ejecta. The mass flux ratio of ejecta to colliding fallback cloud particles, 

xcl →ej , is given by 

xcl →ej =

 3k

4π

 vcl 

vmin 

3μ

(C6) for vcl > 0, whereas xcl →ej = 0 otherwise. The mass and momentum conversion from the in to the ej components are caused by collisions of the in 

component with the planetesimal surface. Thus, ˙Σin →ej 

and ˙ pin →ej are given by ˙Σin →ej = fpl xin →ej ρdvpl 

Spl 

Scl 

, (C7) ˙pin →ej = ˙Σin →ej vej . (C8) In contrast, the mass and momentum conversion from the in to the cl components are caused by collisions of the in component with the ej or cl components be-fore reaching the planetesimal surface. Thus, ˙Σin →cl and ˙pin →cl are given by ˙Σin →cl = (1 − fpl )ρdvpl , (C9) ˙pin →cl = ˙Σin →cl vpl . (C10) The mass and momentum conversion from the cl to the ej components is caused by fallback of the cl com-ponent onto the planetesimal surface. Thus, ˙Σcl →ej and ˙pcl →ej are given by ˙Σcl →ej = xcl →ej ρcl vcl 

Spl 

Scl 

, (C11) ˙pcl →ej = ˙Σcl →ej vej (C12) for vcl > 0, whereas ˙Σcl →ej = 0 and ˙ pcl →ej = 0 otherwise. The mass and momentum conversion from the ej to the cl components is caused by collisions of the ej com-ponent with the in and cl components. Thus, ˙Σej →cl 

and ˙ pej →cl are given by ˙Σej →cl = Σej 

tstop 

, (C13) ˙pej →cl = pej 

tstop 

. (C14) In our model, cloud particles either accrete onto the planetesimal or leak sideways from the dust cloud as molten chondrules. The removal rates from the dust-cloud system, ˙Σcl →ex and ˙ pcl →ex , are given by ˙Σcl →ex = ρcl · max ( vcl , 0) , (C15) ˙pcl →ex = ˙Σcl →ex vcl . (C16) 

D. DEPENDENCE ON THE EJECTA RADIUS In this study, we adopt Rej = 5 mm as the fiducial value of the ejecta radius. However, this choice is not constrained, and in practice Rej should be determined by future detailed experiments. The cloud thickness, 

hcl , is proportional to the stopping time tstop , which in turn scales with mej /A ej , that is, with Rej . Therefore, adopting a smaller Rej is expected to lead to a smaller cloud thickness. Figure 6 shows the structural evolution of the dust cloud system for the case with Rej = 1 mm instead of 12    

> Figure 6. Same as Figures 4 a–4 e, but for Rej = 1 mm instead of 5 mm.

Rej = 5 mm. As discussed above, the smaller value of 

Rej = 1 mm results in a smaller steady-state hcl than in the fiducial case (Figure 6 c). Consequently, the steady-state value of ˙Mch / ˙Min is also smaller (Figure 6 e). If ˙Mch / ˙Min ≪ 1, the amount of chondrules resupplied to the debris disk should be small. It remains to be dis-cussed whether this is consistent with observational ev-idence that meteoritic chondrules experienced multiple heating events, as well as with the total chondrule mass budget.  

> E.

SPLASHING CRITERION AND MINIMUM EJECTA VELOCITY Molten silicate droplets have high viscosity and sur-face tension, so low-speed collisions with the planetes-imal surface are more likely to result in sticking than in splashing. In particular, because fallback of the cl 

component occurs at lower velocities than that of the 

in component, it may not generate ejecta under some conditions. If surface tension controls the energy dissipation, the critical condition can be described by the Weber num-ber, We. Here, We ≡ 2ρmRdv2cl /σ , where σ = 0 .4 J m −2

is the surface tension of silicate melt. Splashing is ex-pected to occur when collisions take place at We ≳ 10 (e.g., N. Ashgriz & J. Y. Poo 1990; T. Kadono & M. Arakawa 2005; T. Kadono et al. 2008), which corre-sponds to vcl ≳ 3 m s −1. In contrast, if viscosity controls the energy dissipation, the critical condition can be described by the Reynolds number, Re. Here, Re ≡ 2ρmRdvcl /η , where η is the viscosity. The viscos-ity of silicate melt depends strongly on its composition and temperature. Splashing is expected to occur when collisions take place at Re ≳ 100 (e.g., M. Sommerfeld & M. Kuschel 2016; S. Arakawa & T. Nakamoto 2019), which corresponds to vcl ≳ 200 ( η/ 1 Pa s) m s −1.From the above discussion, if the effect of viscosity is negligible, that is, if the impact outcome is controlled primarily by surface energy, we expect ejecta particles to be efficiently generated at the planetesimal surface when vcl > 10 m s −1. Indeed, our numerical results satisfy this condition in the steady state for t > 10 s (Figure 4 a). We also imagine that the minimum ejecta velocity, vmin , is of the same order as the critical velocity for the sticking-to-splashing transition, and we therefore adopt vmin = 10 m s −1.We note that, if viscous effects are important, ejecta particles may not be generated by fallback of cloud par-ticles unless vcl ≫ 10 m s −1. In this case, vmin would also be higher than the fiducial value of 10 m s −1,and we therefore adopt vmin = 100 m s −1 instead of 10 m s −1. Figure 7 shows the structural evolution of 13     

> Figure 7. Same as Figures 6 a–6 e, but for vmin = 100 m s −1instead of 10 m s −1.

the dust cloud system for the case with Rej = 1 mm and 

vmin = 100 m s −1. The cloud thickness hcl is propor-tional to |vej |, which in turn scales with vmin . The larger value of vmin = 100 m s −1 results in a larger steady-state value of hcl than in the case with vmin = 10 m s −1

(Figure 7 c). Consequently, the steady-state value of ˙Mch / ˙Min is also larger (Figure 7 e). As discussed above, the conversion efficiency ˙Mch / ˙Min 

varies significantly depending on the assumed value of 

vmin . Both laboratory experiments and theoretical stud-ies to constrain vmin under realistic impact conditions will be important in future work.  

> F.

PEAK TEMPERATURE OF PLANETESIMALS Planetesimals that formed during the earliest stages of Solar System formation were heated internally by the decay energy of the short-lived radionuclide 26 Al. If the peak temperature at the center of a planetesimal, Tpeak ,exceeds ≈ 1500 K, its interior may differentiate into sili-cate and metal components. Here, we estimate Tpeak for planetesimals with radii Rpl ≲ 10 km, which are partic-ularly important in our chondrule formation model. The heating rate per unit mass due to the decay of 

> 26

Al can be written as Q = Q0 exp ( −t/τ d), where t

is the time after CAI formation and τd = 1 Myr is the mean lifetime of 26 Al. Here, Q0 is the heating rate at t = 0. For anhydrous chondritic planetesimals, 

Q0 ≈ 7 J kg −1 yr −1 (e.g., I. S. Sanders & E. R. D. Scott 2012), assuming that 26 Al was spatially homogeneous throughout the protosolar disk and that its initial abun-dance was 26 Al /27 Al ≈ 5 × 10 −5 (e.g., S. J. Desch et al. 2023). The thermal evolution of a planetesimal can be ob-tained by solving the heat diffusion equation. Here, we consider the peak temperature in the limits where the planetesimal radius Rpl is much smaller or much larger than a critical radius Rcr . The critical radius is given by 

Rcr = πpkτ d/(ρc ) ≈ 10 km, where k = 1 W m −1 K−1,

ρ = 3000 kg m −3, and c = 1000 J kg −1 K−1 are typical values of the thermal conductivity, density, and specific heat capacity of rocky materials, respectively (e.g., H. S. Carslaw & J. C. Jaeger 1959). When Rpl ≪ Rcr , the peak temperature is determined by the balance between heating by the decay of 26 Al and heat diffusion within the planetesimal. It is approx-imately given by (e.g., H. S. Carslaw & J. C. Jaeger 1959) 

Tpeak ≈ Ts + ρQ 0

6k Rpl 2 exp 



− tτd



, (F17) where Ts is the surface temperature of the planetesimal. For example, substituting t = 1 Myr, Rpl = 2 km, and 14 

Ts = 300 K into Equation (F17) gives Tpeak ∼ 500 K. This temperature is far below 1500 K, indicating that such a small planetesimal is unlikely to undergo silicate– metal differentiation. In contrast, for Rpl ≫ Rcr , the peak temperature is determined by the time-integrated heating due to the de-cay of 26 Al. In this limit, Tpeak is approximately given by Tpeak ≈ Ts + ( Q0τd/c ) exp ( −t/τ d). Using t = 1 Myr and Ts = 300 K, we obtain Tpeak ∼ 3000 K. This temperature is far above 1500 K, indicating that such an early-formed, large planetesimal is likely to undergo silicate–metal differentiation and may correspond to an achondrite parent body. REFERENCES 

Alexander, C. M. O. D., Grossman, J. N., Ebel, D. S., & Ciesla, F. J. 2008, The Formation Conditions of Chondrules and Chondrites, Science, 320, 1617, doi: 10.1126/science.1156561 Andrews, S. M. 2020, Observations of Protoplanetary Disk Structures, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 58, 483, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-031220-010302 Arakawa, S., & Nakamoto, T. 2016, Compound chondrule formation via collision of supercooled droplets, Icarus, 276, 102, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2016.04.041 Arakawa, S., & Nakamoto, T. 2019, Compound Chondrule Formation in Optically Thin Shock Waves, The Astrophysical Journal, 877, 84, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab1b3e Ashgriz, N., & Poo, J. Y. 1990, Coalescence and separation in binary collisions of liquid drops, Journal of Fluid Mechanics, 221, 183, doi: 10.1017/S0022112090003536 Asphaug, E., Jutzi, M., & Movshovitz, N. 2011, Chondrule formation during planetesimal accretion, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 308, 369, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2011.06.007 Barber, M. G., Mann, A. W., Vanderburg, A., et al. 2024, A giant planet transiting a 3-Myr protostar with a misaligned disk, Nature, 635, 574, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-08123-3 Boley, A. C., Morris, M. A., & Desch, S. J. 2013, High-temperature Processing of Solids through Solar Nebular Bow Shocks: 3D Radiation Hydrodynamics Simulations with Particles, The Astrophysical Journal, 776, 101, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/776/2/101 Bottke, W. F., Nolan, M. C., Greenberg, R., & Kolvoord, R. A. 1994, Velocity Distributions among Colliding Asteroids, Icarus, 107, 255, doi: 10.1006/icar.1994.1021 Carpenter, J. M., Mamajek, E. E., Hillenbrand, L. A., & Meyer, M. R. 2009, Debris Disks in the Upper Scorpius OB Association, The Astrophysical Journal, 705, 1646, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/705/2/1646 Carrera, D., Gorti, U., Johansen, A., & Davies, M. B. 2017, Planetesimal Formation by the Streaming Instability in a Photoevaporating Disk, The Astrophysical Journal, 839, 16, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa6932 Carslaw, H. S., & Jaeger, J. C. 1959, Conduction of heat in solids Cashion, M. D., Johnson, B. C., Krot, A. N., et al. 2022, Chondrule formation via impact jetting in the icy outer solar system, Icarus, 384, 115110, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115110 Chiang, E., & Youdin, A. N. 2010, Forming Planetesimals in Solar and Extrasolar Nebulae, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 38, 493, doi: 10.1146/annurev-earth-040809-152513 Choksi, N., Chiang, E., Connolly, Jr., H. C., Gainsforth, Z., & Westphal, A. J. 2021, Chondrules from high-velocity collisions: thermal histories and the agglomeration problem, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 503, 3297, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab503 Ciesla, F. J., Hood, L. L., & Weidenschilling, S. J. 2004, Evaluating planetesimal bow shocks as sites for chondrule formation, Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 39, 1809, doi: 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2004.tb00077.x Currie, T., & Kenyon, S. J. 2009, Deep MIPS Observations of the IC 348 Nebula: Constraints on the Evolutionary State of Anemic Circumstellar Disks and the Primordial-to-Debris Disk Transition, The Astronomical Journal, 138, 703, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/138/3/703 Desch, S. J. 2007, Mass Distribution and Planet Formation in the Solar Nebula, The Astrophysical Journal, 671, 878, doi: 10.1086/522825 Desch, S. J., Dunlap, D. R., Dunham, E. T., Williams, C. D., & Mane, P. 2023, Statistical chronometry of meteorites. I. A Test of 26 Al homogeneity and the Pb-Pb age of the solar system’s t = 0, Icarus, 402, 115607, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2023.115607 Dullemond, C. P., Stammler, S. M., & Johansen, A. 2014, Forming Chondrules in Impact Splashes. I. Radiative Cooling Model, The Astrophysical Journal, 794, 91, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/794/1/91 15 

Ebel, D. S., & Grossman, L. 2000, Condensation in dust-enriched systems, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 64, 339, doi: 10.1016/S0016-7037(99)00284-7 Ercolano, B., & Pascucci, I. 2017, The dispersal of planet-forming discs: theory confronts observations, Royal Society Open Science, 4, 170114, doi: 10.1098/rsos.170114 Fedkin, A. V., & Grossman, L. 2013, Vapor saturation of sodium: Key to unlocking the origin of chondrules, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 112, 226, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2013.02.020 Fukuda, K., Tenner, T. J., Kimura, M., et al. 2022, A temporal shift of chondrule generation from the inner to outer Solar System inferred from oxygen isotopes and Al-Mg chronology of chondrules from primitive CM and CO chondrites, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 322, 194, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2021.12.027 Haffert, S. Y., Bohn, A. J., de Boer, J., et al. 2019, Two accreting protoplanets around the young star PDS 70, Nature Astronomy, 3, 749, doi: 10.1038/s41550-019-0780-5 Hanai, S., Fukuda, K., Kanemaru, R., et al. 2025, Oxygen Isotope Systematics of “Mini” Chondrules in Northwest Africa (NWA) 8613 (CV3red), LPI Contributions, 3088, 5111 Hansen, B. M. S. 2009, Formation of the Terrestrial Planets from a Narrow Annulus, The Astrophysical Journal, 703, 1131, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/703/1/1131 Hayashi, C. 1981, Structure of the Solar Nebula, Growth and Decay of Magnetic Fields and Effects of Magnetic and Turbulent Viscosities on the Nebula, Progress of Theoretical Physics Supplement, 70, 35, doi: 10.1143/PTPS.70.35 Hood, L. L., Ciesla, F. J., & Weidenschilling, S. J. 2005, Chondrule Formation in Planetesimal Bow Shocks: Heating and Cooling Rates, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 341, Chondrites and the Protoplanetary Disk, ed. A. N. Krot, E. R. D. Scott, & B. Reipurth, 873 Housen, K. R., & Holsapple, K. A. 2011, Ejecta from impact craters, Icarus, 211, 856, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2010.09.017 Hughes, A. M., Duchˆ ene, G., & Matthews, B. C. 2018, Debris Disks: Structure, Composition, and Variability, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 56, 541, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081817-052035 Iizuka, T., Hibiya, Y., Yoshihara, S., & Hayakawa, T. 2025, Timescales of Solar System Formation Based on Al–Ti Isotope Correlation by Supernova Ejecta, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 979, L29, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ada554 Jacquet, E. 2021, Collisions and compositional variability in chondrule-forming events, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 296, 18, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2020.12.025 Johnson, B. C., Minton, D. A., Melosh, H. J., & Zuber, M. T. 2015, Impact jetting as the origin of chondrules, Nature, 517, 339, doi: 10.1038/nature14105 Jones, R. H., Villeneuve, J., & Libourel, G. 2018, Thermal Histories of Chondrules, in Chondrules: Records of Protoplanetary Disk Processes, ed. S. S. Russell, H. C. Connolly, Jr., & A. N. Krot, 57–90, doi: 10.1017/9781108284073.003 Kadono, T., & Arakawa, M. 2005, Breakup of liquids by high velocity flow and size distribution of chondrules, Icarus, 173, 295, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2004.08.014 Kadono, T., Arakawa, M., & Kouchi, A. 2008, Size distributions of chondrules and dispersed droplets caused by liquid breakup: An application to shock wave conditions in the solar nebula, Icarus, 197, 621, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2008.05.002 Kadono, T., Suzuki, A. I., Wada, K., et al. 2015, Crater-ray formation by impact-induced ejecta particles, Icarus, 250, 215, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2014.11.030 Kaneko, H., Sato, K., Ikeda, C., & Nakamoto, T. 2023, Cooling Rates of Chondrules after Lightning Discharge in Solid-rich Environments, The Astrophysical Journal, 947, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acb20e Kleine, T., Budde, G., Burkhardt, C., et al. 2020, The Non-carbonaceous-Carbonaceous Meteorite Dichotomy, Space Science Reviews, 216, 55, doi: 10.1007/s11214-020-00675-w Kobayashi, H., & Tanaka, H. 2021, Rapid Formation of Gas-giant Planets via Collisional Coagulation from Dust Grains to Planetary Cores, The Astrophysical Journal, 922, 16, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac289c Krot, A. N., Meibom, A., Weisberg, M. K., & Keil, K. 2002, Invited Review: The CR chondrite clan: Implications for early solar system processes, Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 37, 1451, doi: 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2002.tb00805.x Krot, A. N., Petaev, M. I., Nagashima, K., et al. 2022, Impact plume-formed and protoplanetary disk high-temperature components in CB and CH metal-rich carbonaceous chondrites, Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 57, 352, doi: 10.1111/maps.13717 16 

Kruijer, T. S., Burkhardt, C., Budde, G., & Kleine, T. 2017, Age of Jupiter inferred from the distinct genetics and formation times of meteorites, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, 6712, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1704461114 Kunitomo, M., Suzuki, T. K., & Inutsuka, S.-i. 2020, Dispersal of protoplanetary discs by the combination of magnetically driven and photoevaporative winds, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 492, 3849, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa087 Lee, M. R., Alexander, C. M. O., Bischoff, A., et al. 2025, Low-Temperature Aqueous Alteration of Chondrites, Space Science Reviews, 221, 11, doi: 10.1007/s11214-024-01132-8 Libourel, G., Krot, A. N., & Tissandier, L. 2006, Role of gas-melt interaction during chondrule formation, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 251, 232, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2006.09.011 Lichtenberg, T., Golabek, G. J., Dullemond, C. P., et al. 2018, Impact splash chondrule formation during planetesimal recycling, Icarus, 302, 27, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.11.004 Marrocchi, Y., Jones, R. H., Russell, S. S., et al. 2024a, Chondrule Properties and Formation Conditions, Space Science Reviews, 220, 69, doi: 10.1007/s11214-024-01102-0 Marrocchi, Y., Longeau, A., Goupil, R. L., et al. 2024b, Isotopic evolution of the inner solar system revealed by size-dependent oxygen isotopic variations in chondrules, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 371, 52, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2024.03.001 Marzari, F., & Weidenschilling, S. 2002, Mean Motion Resonances, Gas Drag, and Supersonic Planetesimals in the Solar Nebula, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 82, 225, doi: 10.1023/A:1015067000812 Miura, H., Morita, T., Nakamura, T., et al. 2025, Decoding the formation of barred olivine chondrules: Realization of numerical replication, Science Advances, 11, eadw1187, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.adw1187 Mizuki, T., Momose, M., Aizawa, M., & Kobayashi, H. 2024, Frequencies of Warm Debris Disks Based on Point Source Catalogs of Spitzer, WISE, and Gaia, The Astronomical Journal, 167, 275, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad3df8 Nagasawa, M., Tanaka, K. K., Tanaka, H., et al. 2014, Revisiting Jovian-resonance Induced Chondrule Formation, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 794, L7, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/794/1/L7 Nagasawa, M., Tanaka, K. K., Tanaka, H., et al. 2019, Shock-generating Planetesimals Perturbed by a Giant Planet in a Gas Disk, The Astrophysical Journal, 871, 110, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaf795 Ruzicka, A., Floss, C., & Hutson, M. 2008, Relict olivine grains, chondrule recycling, and implications for the chemical, thermal, and mechanical processing of nebular materials, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 72, 5530, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2008.08.017 Ruzicka, A., Hiyagon, H., Hutson, M., & Floss, C. 2007, Relict olivine, chondrule recycling, and the evolution of nebular oxygen reservoirs, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 257, 274, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2007.02.037 Sanders, I. S., & Scott, E. R. D. 2012, The origin of chondrules and chondrites: Debris from low-velocity impacts between molten planetesimals?, Meteoritics & Planetary Science, 47, 2170, doi: 10.1111/maps.12002 Scott, E. R. D. 2007, Chondrites and the Protoplanetary Disk, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 35, 577, doi: 10.1146/annurev.earth.35.031306.140100 Siron, G., Fukuda, K., Kimura, M., & Kita, N. T. 2021, New constraints from 26 Al-26 Mg chronology of anorthite bearing chondrules in unequilibrated ordinary chondrites, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 293, 103, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2020.10.025 Siron, G., Fukuda, K., Kimura, M., & Kita, N. T. 2022, High precision 26 Al-26 Mg chronology of chondrules in unequilibrated ordinary chondrites: Evidence for restricted formation ages, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 324, 312, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2022.02.010 Sirono, S.-i., & Turrini, D. 2025, Chondrule formation by collisions of planetesimals containing volatiles triggered by Jupiter’s formation, Scientific Reports, 15, 30919, doi: 10.1038/s41598-025-12643-x Sommerfeld, M., & Kuschel, M. 2016, Modelling droplet collision outcomes for different substances and viscosities, Experiments in Fluids, 57, 187, doi: 10.1007/s00348-016-2249-y Stewart, S. T., Lock, S. J., Carter, P. J., et al. 2025, Planetesimal Impact Vapor Plumes and Nebular Shocks Form Chondritic Mixtures, The Planetary Science Journal, 6, 108, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/adbe71 Tanaka, H., Murase, K., & Tanigawa, T. 2020, Final Masses of Giant Planets. III. Effect of Photoevaporation and a New Planetary Migration Model, The Astrophysical Journal, 891, 143, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab77af Tanigawa, T., & Tanaka, H. 2016, Final Masses of Giant Planets. II. Jupiter Formation in a Gas-depleted Disk, The Astrophysical Journal, 823, 48, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/1/48 17 

Tenner, T. J., Ushikubo, T., Nakashima, D., et al. 2018, Oxygen Isotope Characteristics of Chondrules from Recent Studies by Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry, in Chondrules: Records of Protoplanetary Disk Processes, ed. S. S. Russell, H. C. Connolly, Jr., & A. N. Krot, 196–246, doi: 10.1017/9781108284073.008 van Kooten, E., Schiller, M., Moynier, F., et al. 2021, Hybrid Accretion of Carbonaceous Chondrites by Radial Transport across the Jupiter Barrier, The Astrophysical Journal, 910, 70, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abd9c8 Walsh, K. J., & Levison, H. F. 2016, Terrestrial Planet Formation from an Annulus, The Astronomical Journal, 152, 68, doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/152/3/68 Warren, P. H. 2011, Stable-isotopic anomalies and the accretionary assemblage of the Earth and Mars: A subordinate role for carbonaceous chondrites, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 311, 93, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2011.08.047 Weidenschilling, S. J. 1977, The Distribution of Mass in the Planetary System and Solar Nebula, Astrophysics and Space Science, 51, 153, doi: 10.1007/BF00642464 Weidenschilling, S. J., Marzari, F., & Hood, L. L. 1998, The Origin of Chondrules at Jovian Resonances, Science, 279, 681, doi: 10.1126/science.279.5351.681 Yokoyama, T., Nagai, Y., Fukai, R., & Hirata, T. 2019, Origin and Evolution of Distinct Molybdenum Isotopic Variabilities within Carbonaceous and Noncarbonaceous Reservoirs, The Astrophysical Journal, 883, 62, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab39e7 Youdin, A. N., & Shu, F. H. 2002, Planetesimal Formation by Gravitational Instability, The Astrophysical Journal, 580, 494, doi: 10.1086/343109