Title: Around the water snowline: I. Effects of dynamical and chemical interplay on mid-infrared water spectra of protoplanetary discs

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.17016v1

Published Time: Wed, 16 Sep 2026 01:21:53 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) Preprint 16 September 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3 

# Around the water snowline: I. Effects of dynamical and chemical interplay on mid-infrared water spectra of protoplanetary discs 

# Till Kaeufer ,1★, Sebastiaan Krijt ,1, Edwin A. Bergin ,2, Andrea Banzatti ,3, and Joe Williams ,1 

> 1

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QL, UK  

> 2

Department of Astronomy, University of Michigan, 1085 S. University Ave., Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA  

> 3

Department of Physics, Texas State University, 749 N Comanche Street, San Marcos, TX 78666, USA 

Accepted 2026 September 15. Received 2026 September 8; in original form 2026 July 24 

ABSTRACT 

Protoplanetary discs’ infrared water spectra (e.g. as observed by JWST) encode information about the underlying water distribution and physical conditions. In this work, we examine and quantify the imprint of various dynamical processes (operating alone or in unison) on water abundances and emerging spectra using a new 2D model called Molecular emission Affected by Gas, Pebble, and Ice Evolution (MAGPIE). This model combines diffusion and advection for water (and associated species) and dust grains with aerodynamically decoupled pebbles, and photodissociation and a gas-phase water formation prescription. In general, we find that transport processes have a major impact on the inner disc’s water content and can (re)plenish the layer above the ice reservoir which in static models is water-poor due to photodissociation. In particular, adding diffusion to a chemical model can result in strong changes in the spectrum (e.g. a flux increases of colder compared to warmer water lines) that recent work has associated with pebble drift. Adding pebble drift dramatically increases the inner disc water abundance but, surprisingly, does not readily lead to a further increase of cold water tracers as (1) efficient outward transport of water vapour is inhibited by a conveyor belt effect of incoming pebbles, and (2) the increase in hot water line fluxes overshadows smaller increases of colder lines. We conclude that dynamical processes have a significant but complex impact on water spectra. Future work should explore a range in stellar (e.g. UV irradiation) and disc properties to comprehensively understand the observed diversity of water emission. 

Key words: protoplanetary discs – infrared: general – astrochemistry – methods: numerical – techniques: spectroscopic 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Mid-infrared (mid-IR) observations probe the innermost regions (< 10 au) of protoplanetary discs. Planets commonly form in these regions (Morbidelli et al. 2012). Therefore, the planet compositions are influenced by the conditions in these disc regions (e.g. Öberg et al. 2011; Bitsch et al. 2019; Mollière et al. 2022). Water is of spe-cial interest due to its importance for the formation process of planets via its impact on dynamics and solid accretion (e.g. Ros & Johansen 2013; Schoonenberg & Ormel 2017; Drążkowska et al. 2023) and the impact on planet habitability (e.g. Krijt et al. 2023). Observations of different water lines probe different water reser-voirs. Typically, less than a few percent of the total water vapour reservoir is visible in mid- and far-IR observations (Bosman et al. 2022; Leemker et al. 2025). This means that these observations only probe a thin layer in the disc’s surface, while most water mass is concealed closer to the midplane due to dust opacities (Houge et al. 2025). However, mid-IR spectra taken by the Spitzer space telescope frequently observed a high forest of water lines (Carr & Najita 2008; Salyk et al. 2008). While these observations were initially modelled with a single temperature component (e.g. Carr & Najita 2011; Salyk  

> ★

E-mail: t.kaeufer@exeter.ac.uk 

et al. 2011), recent observations from the Mid-InfraRed Instrument (MIRI) on board the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), bene-fitting from increased spectral resolution and sensitivity compared to Spitzer, clearly showed deviations from single temperature emis-sion, supporting gradients first emerged by combining ground-based spectra (Banzatti et al. 2023a). Multiple temperature components (e.g. Temmink et al. 2024), radial power laws (e.g. Kaeufer et al. 2026), tapered power laws (e.g. Romero-Mirza et al. 2024), or even more complex profiles (Temmink et al. 2025) are now used to analyse water spectra as observed with JWST/MIRI. Analyses of water spectra show that different discs are dominated by different emission temperatures (Banzatti et al. 2023a,b). Romero-Mirza et al. (2024); Banzatti et al. (2025) and Romero-Mirza et al. submitted show for samples of 8 −40 discs that compact discs exhibit a cold water ( 𝑇 ∼ 200 K) excess compared to extended discs. A cold water excess means that the ratio between water lines with lower and higher upper level energies is enhanced. Specifically, two lines with upper level energies around 1500 K are enhanced compared to a water line with an upper level energy of 3600 K. Alternatively, studies have tried to link variations in cold water excess to the positions of the innermost gap (Krijt et al. 2025). Both the radial disc size and radial location and depth of the innermost resolved gap are proposed to be related to the magnitude of ongoing pebble drift reaching the 

© 2026 The Authors arXiv:2609.17016v1 [astro-ph.EP] 15 Sep 2026 2 T. Kaeufer et al. 

disc’s snowline (Kalyaan et al. 2021, 2023). The underlying idea is that pebbles drift inwards over time, releasing their icy mantles into the gas-phase when crossing the species’ iceline leading to an increase in emission close to the iceline temperature of ∼ 120 −

180 K (Lodders 2003). While for other species this process can be complicated by entrapment of volatiles inside water ice (e.g. Bar-Nun et al. 1985; Bergner et al. 2024; Williams et al. 2025), water as the main icy species with the highest sublimation temperature is commonly thought to be released at the water iceline, the so-called snowline. Several efforts have been made to model the drift of icy pebbles and release of volatiles in detail. Cuzzi & Zahnle (2004) show that drifting pebbles can increase the water vapour concentration inside the snowline by factors of up to 10 − 100 (see also Ciesla & Cuzzi 2006, who reached enhancement factors of up to 10). Other studies highlight the dependence on grain size for the exact location where grains desorb their volatiles (Piso et al. 2015), the process of water delivery to planetesimal embryos (Sato et al. 2016), and linking planetary compositions to their formation history (Booth et al. 2017; Schneider & Bitsch 2021). However, linking the well-studied process of pebble drift and ice sublimation to JWST/MIRI spectra is challenging because the above mentioned models only include the radial dimension. As a result, to connect the two, studies have either resorted to simplified analytical arguments (e.g. Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Krijt et al. 2025), built in parametrized elevated abundances in 2D models (Vlasblom et al. 2025), or extended 1D dynamical models to 1+1D (Sellek et al. 2025; Houge et al. 2025). These works highlight the strong spectral impact of drift on mid-IR spectra through the desorption of species that are directly observable (Sellek et al. 2025), through an increase of dust opacity hiding more disc material (Houge et al. 2025), and through the change of elemental abundances which affects the inner disc’s chemistry (Sellek & van Dishoeck 2025). In this paper, we address these problems by creating a 2D (radial and vertical) disc model, called Molecular emission Affected by Gas, Pebble, and Ice Evolution (MAGPIE). The goal is to directly link the transport processes that are dominating in the midplane to higher disc regions that are frequently observed. This model includes dynamical processes (diffusion and advection) for water vapour, water ice, small dust grains, other gas-phase species, and pebbles as well as a simple chemical description to describe photodissociation and gas-phase water formation. We showcase the influence of all the modelled processes on the water density structure and simulate time-dependent mid-IR spectra and diagnostic diagrams that allow for a comparison with JWST/MIRI observations. This paper is organised as follows. We introduce the model in Sect. 2. Section 3 and Section 4 compare the evolution of the water concentrations and observables of models that include different pro-cesses. The impact of these processes and the wider implications are discussed in Sect. 5 before the paper is concluded (Sect. 6). 

2 METHODS 

This section introduces the Molecular emission Affected by Gas, Pebble, and Ice Evolution (MAGPIE) model, which is used to ex-amine the influence of dynamics and chemistry on the gas-phase water abundance. All processes that influence the water abundance and are included in the model are highlighted in Fig. 1. After list-ing the disc setup (Section 2.1), we explain the implementation of transport processes (Section 2.2), ice-gas interactions (Section 2.3), chemistry (Section 2.4), pebbles (Section 2.5), and the numerical                                                                                               

> Table 1. Parameters of the model listed with their fiducial value. Symbol Explanation Value Structure
> 𝑀 disc [M⊙]Gas mass 0.02
> 𝑀 dust [M⊙]Total solid mass 0.01 𝑀 disc
> 𝑟 c[au ]Characteristic radius 30
> 𝑝 Power law index of the surface den-sity 1.0
> 𝑀 ∗[M⊙]Stellar mass 0.7
> 𝐻 0[au ]Scale height at 𝑟 0=100 au 10 .0
> 𝛽 Flaring index 1.15 Temperature
> 𝑇 0[K]Midplane temperature at 1 au 150
> 𝑞 Temperature power law index 0.5
> 𝜙 TAtmospheric temperature increase compared to midplane 2
> 𝛿 TVertical temperature profile 4.0
> 𝑧 q[Hg]Lower limit of atmosphere 4.0Evolution
> 𝛼 Turbulence 10 −3
> 𝑓 cSimulation timestep (as fraction of smallest timescale) 0.1Dust and pebbles
> 𝑠 •[cm ]Small dust grain size 10 −5
> 𝜌 •[g/cm 3]Dust/pebble grain internal density 1.6
> 𝑣 frag [m/s]Pebble fragmentation velocity 10 .0Ice
> 𝐹 UV [cm −2s−1]Incident vertical UV flux 10 8
> 𝑌 [photon −1]Photodesorption yield 10 −2
> 𝑁 s[cm −2]Adsorption site density 10 15
> 𝑓 wStickiness of the ice 0.5
> E/ 𝑘 B[K]H2O binding energy 5770 Chemistry
> 𝑡 UV ,0[yr ]Photodissociation timescale 40 .0
> 𝜁 CR [s−1]Cosmic ray ionisation rate 1.7×10 −17
> 𝜖 H2OAbundance of H 2O10 −4
> 𝜖 CO Abundance of CO 10 −4
> 𝜖 H2Abundance of H 20.5
> 𝜖 Otot Total oxygen abundance 3.2×10 −4
> Observations
> 𝑑 [pc ]Distance to object 140
> 𝑖 [◦]Inclination 0.0

details (Section 2.6). This model follows many ideas introduced by Ciesla (2009); Krijt et al. (2018, 2020), but consists of a new imple-mentation optimised for the inner disc region around the water snow line, an implementation of the most important chemical processes of water, and a fast description of pebble transport. Additionally, the disc densities can be translated to simulated JWST/MIRI spectra (Section 2.7). 

2.1 Disc setup 

2.1.1 Density structure 

We assume a gas surface density distribution ( Σg) that follows a radial (𝑟 ) tapered power law:  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 3  

> Figure 1. Schematic representation of a protoplanetary disc (bottom) with a zoom-in (centre) onto the water snowline. The schematic shows how in-drifting icy pebbles cross the water snowline, sublimate their ice, and enrich the water gas-phase abundance. The four boxes show all processes modelled by MAGPIE. Dust evolution entails coagulation of small dust grains into pebbles and fragmentation of these pebbles. Dynamics covers diffusion and advection, which includes pebble drift as well. The chemical processes modelled by MAGPIE include gas-phase formation of water via H 3+and photodissociation accounting for shielding by H 2O and OH. Additionally, we model thermal and photodesorption of ice and freeze out onto dust grains and pebbles. Lastly, the background of the main panel indicates the underlying mid-IR opacity structure which is solved time dependently to simulate JWST/MIRI observations. (Inspired by Fig. 1 of Houge et al. 2025)

Σg (𝑟 ) = Σ c

 𝑟 𝑟 c

 − 𝑝 

exp 

"

−

 𝑟 𝑟 c

2− 𝑝 #

. (1) This power law is fixed at the critical radius ( 𝑟 c) and corresponding critical surface density ( Σc) and depends on the surface density expo-nent ( 𝑝 ). The values for all parameters are provided in Table 1. The critical surface density can be related to the total disc mass ( 𝑀 disc )using 

Σc = (2 − 𝑝 ) 𝑀 disc 

2𝜋𝑟 2c

. (2) We assume a parametrised gas scale height ( 𝐻 g) that follows a power law dependent on a scale height 𝐻 0 at radius 𝑟 0 and the power law index 𝛽 :

𝐻 g (𝑟 ) = 𝐻 0

 𝑟 𝑟 0

 −𝛽 

. (3) Using this scale height, the gas surface densities can be translated to local densities 𝜌 g at any given radius and height over the disc midplane ( 𝑧 ) with: 

𝜌 g (𝑟, 𝑧 ) = Σg (𝑟 )√2𝜋𝐻 g

exp 

"

− 12

 𝑧 𝐻 g

2 #

. (4) The gas density structure of the model examined in this paper can be seen in Fig. 2. We note that the spatial grid in radius and height (details in Sect. 2.6.1) undersamples small 𝑧 /𝑟 values at small radii (compare to dotted lines in Fig. 2). Therefore, after calculat-ing 𝜌 g (𝑟, 𝑧 ) at every grid point, the surface densities obtained by vertically integrating said densities are rescaled to adhere to Eq. 1. Using a gas-to-dust ratio (100 for our fiducial model), the gas density is translated into dust densities 𝜌 d.Lastly, the Keplerian frequency Ω at any given radius is calculated using the star mass ( 𝑀 ★) and the gravitational constant 𝐺 :

Ω(𝑟 ) =√︂ 𝐺 𝑀 ★

𝑟 3 . (5) 

2.1.2 Temperature structure 

In this study, we fix the temperature structure during the model’s evo-lution and assume that the dust and gas temperature are the same. In reality, the disc temperature structure is influenced by many factors, some of which will be time dependent. For example, the chemistry af-fects the disc gas temperature and will cause it to deviate significantly from the dust temperature (Woitke et al. 2009). Additionally, chang-ing the dust density structure or latent heat released by sublimating ices change the radiative transfer solution, leading to significant evo-lutions in a disc’s temperature (Wang et al. 2025). While fixing the temperature structure is not realistic, it is commonly done in disc evolution models in 1D and 2D (e.g. Krijt et al. 2018; Stammler & Birnstiel 2022). The main concern is the computational cost to solve the radiative transfer equation for every time step. Therefore, this approach is limited so far to individual studies (e.g. Robinson et al. 2024). We assume a fixed temperature distribution (Fig. 2). The tem-perature is governed by the midplane ( 𝑇 mid ) and disc atmosphere temperature ( 𝑇 atm ) where the atmosphere is defined as 𝑧 atm = 𝑧 q 𝐻 g 

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 4 T. Kaeufer et al.  

> Figure 2. Gas density (colour map) and temperature structure (coloured contours) of the fiducial model. The red dashed snowline marks the transition between the majority of water present in ice or vapour. The dotted lines denote equal disc heights.

in terms of factors ( 𝑧 q) of the radius dependent scale heights. Follow-ing previous studies (e.g. Dartois et al. 2003; Rosenfeld et al. 2013), we model the transition between the two values as 

𝑇 (𝑟, 𝑧 ) = 𝑇 mid (𝑟 ) + ( 𝑇 atm (𝑟 ) − 𝑇 mid (𝑟 )) 



sin 

 𝜋𝑧 

2𝑧 q 𝐻 g (𝑟 )

 2 𝛿 

(6) with the strength of the transition determined by 𝛿 .The midplane temperature is defined as a power law dependent on the temperature at 1 au ( 𝑇 0) and the power law index ( 𝑞 ): 𝑇 mid =

𝑇 0 (𝑟 )−𝑞 . The parametrised temperature in the disc’s atmosphere is a constant factor ( 𝜙 T) higher than the midplane temperature ( 𝑇 atm (𝑟 ) =

𝜙 T𝑇 mid (𝑟 )). This 2D temperature structure mimics more realistic temperature profiles determined via CO observation (e.g. Dutrey et al. 2017; Galloway-Sprietsma et al. 2025). We assume that any material immediately adjusts to the cell tem-perature when entering a given grid cell, because the typical timescale for dust grains in protoplanetary discs to adjust to changing radiation field conditions is in the order of seconds to hours (Chiang & Gol-dreich 1997) which is much shorter than the time steps considered in this study. We note that the used temperature profile mimics a passively heated disc. Accretion heating can significantly alter the tempera-ture structure (e.g. Calahan et al. 2026). We refer to Sect. 5.3 for a discussion on how changes to the temperature structure affect our results. 

2.2 Diffusion & Advection 

The core goal of this model is to dynamically evolve water vapour in the disc setup highlighted in Section 2.1. As shown in the bottom right box of Fig. 1, we assume a viscous disc and solve the advection-diffusion equation for all relevant quantities: 

𝜕𝐶 𝑖 

𝜕𝑡 =

> Radial diffusion

z }| {

1

𝑟 𝜌 g

𝜕 𝜕𝑟 



𝑟 𝜌 g 𝐷 𝑖 

𝜕𝐶 𝑖 

𝜕𝑟 



−

> Radial advection

z }| {

1

𝑟 𝜌 g

𝜕 𝜕𝑟 

 𝑟𝜈 𝑟 ,𝑖 𝜌 g𝐶 𝑖 



+ 1

𝜌 g

𝜕 𝜕𝑧 



𝜌 g 𝐷 𝑖 

𝜕𝐶 𝑖 

𝜕𝑧 

| {z }

> Vertical diffusion

− 1

𝜌 g

𝜕 𝜕𝑧 

 𝜈 𝑧,𝑖 𝜌 g𝐶 𝑖 

| {z }

> Vertical advection

.

(7) In this equation, 𝐶 𝑖 denotes the concentration ( 𝜌 𝑖 /𝜌 g) of a species 

𝑖 , with 𝐷 𝑖 being the corresponding diffusion coefficient and 𝜈 𝑟 ,𝑖 and 

𝜈 𝑧,𝑖 describing the radial and vertical advection velocity. We evolve water vapour ( 𝐶 H2O), small dust grains ( 𝐶 d), ice on small dust grains (𝐶 ice ), OH vapour ( 𝐶 OH ), and oxygen vapour ( 𝐶 O; more details in Section 2.4). Shakura & Sunyaev (1973) parametrise the turbulent viscosity in a gas disc as 𝜈 T = 𝛼𝑐 s,mid 𝐻 g, with 𝛼 being direction independent and 𝑐 s

describing the midplane sound speed ( 𝑐 𝑠, mid =√︁ 𝑘 B𝑇 mid /𝜇𝑚 𝐻 ; with the mean molecular weight 𝜇 = 2.3 and 𝜇 H describing the atomic mass of hydrogen). The diffusion coefficient for all gas species (which is assumed to be the same in the vertical and radial direction) can be related to 𝜈 T using the Schmidt number ( 𝑆𝑐 = 𝜈 T/𝐷 g). We assume a Schmidt number of 1 /3 consistent with other work (e.g. Schneider & Bitsch 2021). The diffusion coefficient for dust grains (and also ice on these grains) deviates from 𝐷 𝑔 depending on the grains’ Stokes number St: 

𝐷 d = 𝐷 g

1 + St 2 . (8) The Stokes number is given by St =√︂ 𝜋 

8

𝑠 • 𝜌 •Ω

𝜌 g𝑐 s

, (9) where 𝑠 • and 𝜌 • denote the dust grain size and internal density, respectively. We note that 𝑐 s is the sound speed evaluated using the local grid cell temperature and not the midplane temperature. To account for advection, we assume a background velocity which is directed towards the star of 

𝜈 g = 32

𝐷 g

𝑟 . (10) Using every grid cell position, 𝜈 g is split into a vertical 𝜈 𝑧, g and radial 𝜈 𝑟 , g component. This velocity is used for all gas species that are evolved with Eq. 7. Additionally, we assume that the small dust grains (and ice on small dust grains) are well coupled to the gas and follow the same velocity field. The used velocity field does not include strong vertical gradients or e.g. meridional flows (see Ciesla 2009). However, due to the generally shorter timescale of pebble drift and diffusion, the exact shape of the velocity field does not have a strong impact on the results. The equations are sufficient to model advection and diffusion for water, small dust grains, ice on small dust grains, OH, and oxygen by using the initial parameters listed in Table 1. 

2.3 Water desorption and sublimation 

Modelling the region around the water snowline requires a detailed description of the balance between vapour and ice water. We follow the ice description as detailed by Krijt et al. (2018) and sketched in the top right box of Fig. 1. In brief, this means that the vapour  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 5

concentration ( 𝐶 H2O) changes according to thermal desorption, pho-todesorption, and freeze-out: 

𝜕𝐶 H2O

𝜕𝑡 = 3𝑣 th 

4𝑠 •

𝜌 d

𝜌 •



> =−C∗

z }| {

𝜌 sat 

𝜌 g

− 𝜌 v

𝜌 g

+ 4𝑚 H2O𝑌 𝐹 uv 

𝑣 th 𝜌 g



. (11) The saturation density is given by: 

𝜌 sat = 𝑚 H2O (4/𝑣 th )𝑁 s × 𝜈 0 exp 



− E

𝑘 B𝑇 



, (12) which depends among other things on the binding energy of water ice (E/ 𝑘 B = 5770 K), the density of absorption sites ( 𝑁 s = 10 15 cm −2)the thermal velocity 𝑣 th =√︁ 8𝑘 B𝑇 /𝜋𝑚 H2O, and vibrational frequency 

𝜈 0 = (2𝑁 s E/ 𝜋 2𝑚 H2O)1/2. We use a molecular mass of water ( 𝑚 H2O)of 18 times the mass of hydrogen. The photodesorption part of Eq. 11 depends on the local UV field 

𝐹 uv and the photodesorption yield 𝑌 which we set to 10 −2/photon (Westley et al. 1995). The local UV field is determined by 𝐹 uv =

𝐹 0𝑒 − 𝜏 uv with 𝐹 0 = Γ 𝐺 0. We follow Krijt et al. (2018) by setting 

Γ = 1 and 𝐺 0 = 10 8 cm −2s−1, which accounts for the interstellar radiation field (Habing 1968). The UV opacity includes the vertically integrated opacity of the small dust grains, H 2O, and OH as detailed in Section 2.4. We note that this description does not account for the stellar UV field the effect of which we discuss in Sect. 3.1 and Sect. 3.2.1. The consequent change of water vapour will be matched by an equivalent change of ice concentration: 

𝜕𝐶 H2O

𝜕𝑡 = − 𝜕𝐶 ice 

𝜕𝑡 . (13) As shown in Eq. 11, to solve this equation during every time step we substitute 𝐶 ∗ leading to 

𝜕𝐶 ∗

𝜕𝑡 = − 3𝜈 th 𝜌 d

4𝑠 • 𝜌 •

𝐶 ∗ , (14) which can be solved as 

𝐶 ∗ (𝑡 + Δ𝑡 ) = 𝐶 ∗ (𝑡 )



1 − exp 



− 3𝜈 th 𝜌 d

4𝑠 • 𝜌 •

Δ𝑡 

 

(15) The water distribution is initialised using the steady-state solution of Eq. 11 (with the additional consideration of ice on pebbles which is discussed in Sect. 2.5.1). The resulting snowline, defined as the position of equal density between water vapour and ice, is shown in Fig. 2. While the snowline reaches inwards to nearly 0 .6 au and 200 K in the midplane, in higher disc regions the snowline is pushed further out (crossing 150 K at 𝑧 /𝑟 ≈ 0.2). This is a consequence of the lower gas densities in higher disc layers (resulting in lower ice fractions due to the density independence of 𝜌 sat ) and the effect of photodesorption. 

2.4 Chemistry 

Gas-phase water reactions in protoplanetary disc are generally well understood (e.g. van Dishoeck et al. 2014, 2021) and modelled in de-tail in static thermochemical models (e.g. Woitke et al. 2009; Bosman et al. 2022). To allow for the coupling with dynamical processes, we only account for the most important processes that alter the wa-ter abundance. These processes are UV-photodissociation (including water self-shielding and OH-shielding) and gas-phase creation of cold water (middle right panel of Fig. 1). To account for water UV-photodissociation, we define a timescale under which water is destroyed (and transformed into OH) by UV photons ( 𝑡 UV ,0 = 40 yr as introduced for a standard interstellar ra-diation field by van Dishoeck et al. 2014) 1. The applied rate is based based on interstellar UV to stay consistent with previously used chemical survival timescales for water (e.g. Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Houge et al. 2025). However, stellar UV can domi-nate the UV field in the inner disc region leading to photodissocia-tion timescales of 𝑡 UV ,0 ≲ 1 yr (e.g. Vlasblom et al. 2025) together with higher photodesorption rates. We discuss this influence when interpreting the results. The photodissociation timescale is only ap-plied in regions where the UV-flux can penetrate. To identify this region we calculate the vertical opacity of the dust, water, and OH (𝜏 UV = 𝜏 UV ,Dust + 𝜏 UV ,Water + 𝜏 UV ,OH ) at every grid point and update the timescale as 𝑡 UV = 𝑡 UV ,0 × exp (𝜏 UV ). The timescale is used to reduce the water concentration by ¤𝐶 Water = −𝐶 Water /𝑡 UV and calcu-late the produced OH. While all photodissociated water forms OH at high temperatures ( > 300 K) due to the efficiency of the OH to H 2Oforward reaction (Wagner & Graff 1987), at low temperature OH is largely further processed (by UV radiation into O) and therefore does not contribute significantly to the shielding of water (Bethell & Bergin 2009). We extract the radial OH distribution in the disc surface from the standard ProDiMo thermochemical model (Woitke et al. 2009) and implement a similar temperature transition in our model. We assume that all photodissociated water above 400 K is transformed into OH, below 200 K only 0 .5 % of photodissociated water ends up in OH with the remaining majority transformed into O, between those regimes the OH/O fraction produced by water pho-todissociation follows a power law that matches both end points. We dynamically evolve both OH and O as independent species. OH will deplete into water if sufficiently shielded from UV radiation. There-fore, we introduce a long timescale of 10 × 𝑡 UV ,0 which translates OH back into water if shielded from UV (with a smooth transition between 𝜏 UV = 1 and 𝜏 UV = 5). We calculate the opacity of water and OH as 𝜏 UV = 𝜎𝑁 , with 𝑁 

denoting the vertical column density from the disc surface to every grid point and 𝜎 = 𝜎 water = 𝜎 OH = 5 × 10 −18 cm 2 (Bethell & Bergin 2009). We set the UV opacity of small dust grains to 10 4 cm 2/g, which roughly matches the opacity of 0 .5 𝜇 m grains with the DIANA stan-dard composition (Woitke et al. 2016) as calculated using optool (Dominik et al. 2021). This opacity is evaluated at 𝜆 UV = 0.1 𝜇 mand integrated vertically downwards using the dust density structure to derive the vertical dust UV opacity. As seen in Fig. 3, for our initial conditions (Table 1) the dust becomes optically thick between 𝑧 /𝑟 = 0.15 and 𝑧 /𝑟 = 0.2. This means that even if water self-shielding is not included or if water is depleted in the upper disc layer, photodissociation will not be effective at disc regions below these heights. The vertical UV opacity of the initialized water density can also be seen in Fig. 3. The water opacity at the inner part of the disc is higher than the dust opacity leading to effective water self shielding. Beyond the water snowline the water abundance drops quickly leading to an abrupt drop in water     

> 1This approach is simplifying a timescale that can vary by orders of mag-nitude (see Fig. 9 in Vlasblom et al. 2025). However, we show in Sect. 3.1 that this approach reasonably approximates more complex results from ther-mochemical models. We discuss how changes in 𝑡 UV ,0affect the results in Sect. 3.1 and Sect. 3.2.1 MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 6 T. Kaeufer et al.        

> Figure 3. Dust UV opacity of the initial conditions of the C model (top row of Table 3). The snowline is marked in red, with the 𝜏 UV ,dust =1 and 𝜏 UV ,gas =1highlighted in white and orange, respectively.

opacity. Therefore, the opacity in this region is dominated by the dust particles. Next to the destruction of water, we also account for the gas-phase formation of water at 𝑇 < 400 K. The main reaction pathway that we model is O + H3+ → OH + (16) OH + + H2 → H2O+ (17) H2O+ + H2 → H3O+ (18) H3O+ + e− → H2O . (19) While most reactions are very fast, the bottleneck is the first re-action including O and H 3+. Therefore, we estimate the amount of water formed as 

¤𝑛 (H2O) = − ¤ 𝑛  H+

> 3

 = 𝑛 (O) 𝑛  H+

> 3

 𝑘 H+  

> 3,H2O

, (20) with 𝑛 denoting the abundance and the reaction rate 𝑘 H+ 

> 3,H2O

, which we estimate to be 10 −9 cm 3/s. This means that the abundance of H +

> 3

and O needs to be known to determine how much water is formed in the gas-phase. We consider one formation and two destruction ways 2

of H 3+:

𝜁 CR + H2 → H3+ (21) H3+ + CO → HCO + + H2 (22) H3+ + H2O → H3O+ + H2 (23) Assuming a steady state of the abundance of H + 

> 3

, we derive that 

𝜕𝑛 (H3+)

𝜕𝑡 = 0 = 𝜁 CR 𝑛 (H2) − 𝑛  H3+  [𝑛 (CO ) 𝑘 1 + 𝑛 (H2O) 𝑘 2]

(24) 

𝑛  H3+  = 𝜁 CR 𝑛 (H2)

𝑛 (CO ) 𝑘 1 + 𝑛 (H2O) 𝑘 2

. (25) This equation can be used to calculate the H 3+ abundance using 

𝜁 CR = 10 −17 s−1 (in our model), 𝑛 (CO ) = 10 −4 × 𝑛 (Gas ), and  

> 2We note that we do not update the water abundance according to Reaction 23 since this reaction has only a small effect on the total water abundance.

𝑛 (H2) = 0.5 × 𝑛 (Gas ). Thermochemical disc models typically show that H 2 is dominating in lower disc regions with H being the dominant hydrogen carrier in the upper layers (e.g. Woitke et al. 2022). We model this transition by removing H 2 from the disc at the upper disc region above the vertical column densities ( 𝑁 ) of 

𝑁 H2 −lim = 5 × 10 20 ln 



43 𝐺 o

𝑛 



. (26) with 𝐺 o denoting the strength of the incident FUV field and 𝑛 be-ing the number density of H-nuclei, following Tielens (2021). Even though this formula has been derived using constant densities, using 

𝐺 o/𝑛 = 1 (resulting in 𝑁 H2 −lim ≃ 1.9 × 10 21 cm −2) reproduces the modelled H/H 2-transition in discs well (as seen in Fig. 4 in Woitke et al. 2022). At regions that do not reach 𝑁 H2 −lim the H 2 abundance decreases exponentially, crossing the point of 10 −6 at 10 20 cm −2,which matches the H 2-abundance slope displayed in Fig. 4 from Woitke et al. (2022). The reaction rate 𝑘 1 (reaction 22) and 𝑘 2 (reaction 23) for Eq. 25 are extracted from UMIST (McElroy et al. 2013). Both rates follow the modified Arrhenius equation (Arrhenius 1889). The coefficients are provided in Table 2. The resulting abundances of CO and H 2 are shown in Fig. A1 and Fig. A2 in Appendix A. These abundances do not evolve with time, as they are set as constant fractions of the gas density. The same is true for the temperatures-dependent reaction rates for the destruction of H3+ (Fig. A3), due to the fixed temperature structure that is assumed. Next to H 3+, the abundance of O is needed to calculate the amount of formed cold water. We assume that the total oxygen abundance which is not locked up in refractory grains is 3 .2×10 −4 (van Dishoeck et al. 2021). From this, we subtract the amount of CO, OH, and H 2O(gas and ice) to derive the abundance of O. During the simulation two things can change the amount of O. First, we assumed that OH which is created by photodissociation is transformed into O at lower temperature ( 𝑇 < 300 K). Second, when water is formed through the reaction of O and H 3+ this decreases the amount of O. These reactions are confined to different parts of the disc (cold photodisso-ciation region and region with high H 3+ abundance). Therefore, the advection-diffusion equation Eq. 7 is solved for O as well. 

2.5 Pebbles 

Next to small dust grains and different gas species, we evolve a pebble population that connects via growth and fragmentation to the dust and transports water ice from the outer to the inner disc through radial drift. We assume that all pebbles are settled and effectively confined to the midplane due to the short settling timescale. Therefore, instead of modelling the 2D distribution, the surface densities are modelled. The pebble scale height ( 𝐻 p) can be calculated based on the gas scale height ( 𝐻 g) according to Birnstiel (2024) as 

𝐻 p = 𝐻 g√︂ 𝛼 

St + 𝛼 . (27) The surface density changes between dust grains and pebbles are vertically distributed using Eq. 27. Pebble densities are governed by fragmentation, coagulation, ra-dial drift, diffusion, and parametrised influx of pebbles from the outer disc  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 7                                      

> Table 2. Reaction rates for H 3+destruction. The coefficients follow for common notation of the modified Arrhenius equation. Reaction 𝛼 𝛽 𝛾 𝑇 limit [K] Reference H3++CO →HCO ++H21.36 ×10 −9−0.14 −3.40 10 −400 Klippenstein et al. (2010) H3++H2O→H3O++H25.90 ×10 −9−0.50 0.00 10 −41000 Kim et al. (1974); Anicich et al. (1975)

𝜕 𝜕𝑡 Σp =

> Coagulation

z }| {

ΩΣ dΣd

Σg

−

> Fragmentation

z }| {

𝑓 col 

Σp

𝑡 col 

−

> Drift

z }| {

1

𝑟 𝜕 𝜕𝑟 

𝑟 Σp 𝜈 Drift 



+ 1

𝑟 𝜕 𝜕𝑟 



𝑟 𝐷 pΣg

𝜕 𝜕𝑟 

 Σp

Σg

 | {z }

> Diffusion

+ ¤Σin 

|{z} 

> Influx

.

(28) with Σp being the pebble surface density, 𝜈 Drift being the pebble drift velocity, 𝑡 col being the collisional time scale of pebbles, 𝐷 p denoting the diffusion coefficient for pebbles (Eq. 8) and the tunable parameter 

𝑓 col adjusts the collisional timescale of pebble to account for some of the simplifying assumption of our 1D approach (details below). 

¤Σin is the parametrised influx of pebbles from the outer disc and only affects the outermost disc cell. We set the constant pebble influx (∼ 2.4 × 10 −4 M⊕ /yr) to replenish the material which is drifting inwards from the outermost cell at the beginning of the simulation and keep it constant over time. We calculate the drift velocity as 

𝜈 Drift = −2𝜂𝑟 Ω St 1 + St 2 , (29) with 𝜂 denoting the dimensionless pressure gradient evaluated in the disc midplane, which is given by 

𝜂 = 12

 𝑐 s

𝑟 Ω

2 𝜕 ln 𝜌 g

𝜕 ln 𝑟 . (30) All coagulated dust grains and fragmented pebbles that transi-tion between the pebble surface density and dust grain density are subtracted/added to the other population to conserve mass. Since dust in the inner disc is generally fragmentation limited in size (Birnstiel et al. 2012), the representative Stokes number of the large dust grain population can be written as: St frag = 𝑓 frag 

3

𝜈 2

> 𝑓

𝛼𝑐 2s

, (31) with 𝑓 frag ≈ 0.37 (Birnstiel et al. 2012), and 𝜈 f denoting the frag-mentation velocity, which we assume to be 5 m s −1. This is related to the particles size via 

𝑎 p = 2St Σg

𝜌 p 𝜋 , (32) with 𝜌 p denoting the internal pebble particle density which is set to the same value as the internal dust grain density 𝜌 • (assumed to be 1.6 gcm −3). The collisional time scale depends on the midplane pebble number density ( 𝑛 p), the collisional cross section ( 𝜎 col ), and the relative particle velocity ( 𝜈 rel ): 

𝑡 col = 1

𝑛 p𝜎 col 𝜈 rel 

. (33) While the local number density can be calculated assuming a Gaus-sian vertical distribution of particles with a scale height 𝐻 p according to Eq. 4, the cross section depends on the particle radius ( 𝑎 frag ) as 

𝜎 col = 4𝜋𝑎 2p. Additionally, we assume that the representative relative velocity is given by the fragmentation velocity 𝜈 frag . As shown in Eq. 28, the pebble collisional timescale is adjusted using the tunable 

𝑓 col parameter. This is done to match pebble/small dust ratios as pre-dicted by other models. Birnstiel et al. (2012) find a typical mass ratio between pebbles and small dust grains of 0 .75 in the fragmentation limited case. In our model, we set Σd/Σ𝑝 = 1/3, by introducing a radius dependent tunable parameter which is calculated by assuming a steady state between coagulation and fragmentation in Eq. 28: 

𝑓 col =

 Σd

Σp

2

| {z }

> (1/3)2

Ω√2𝜋𝐻 p𝑚 p

Σg𝜎 col 𝜈 frag 

. (34) While 𝑓 col is radius dependent, for our model 𝑓 col (1 au ) is approx-imately 0 .04, meaning that the collisional timescale of pebbles is 25 times longer than estimated using midplane densities and fragmen-tation velocities as relative velocities. 

2.5.1 Ice on pebbles 

Next to the pebble surface density, we also evolve the (surface) density of ice on pebbles. The ice on pebbles surface density is evolved using the drift, diffusion, and influx as seen in Eq. 28. The parametrised influx of pebbles ( ¤Σp) is assumed to carry a fraction of water ice which is equivalent to the simulation’s initial water to solid ratio. Additionally, transforming dust into pebbles and vice versa changes the ice concentrations of ice on dust grains and ice on pebbles. The amount of transferred ice is calculated using the surface density of coagulated dust grains and fragmented pebble and the ice to grain ratio of the transformed material ( 𝜌 ice /𝜌 dust in the local cells for dust or Σice /Σpeb for pebbles). This means that even in a steady state between dust coagulation and pebble fragmentation, the ice/pebble ratio can change if the ice/pebble and ice/dust ratio are not identical. To translate the ice surface density into local densities, we assume that the ices on pebbles are vertically distributed by a Gaussian with the pebble scale height and that all pebble/small-grain interactions happen within this distribution. Ice on pebbles interacts also with the water vapour through freeze out and desorption (equivalent to Eq. 11) with all parameters relating to the dust ( 𝜌 d, 𝑠 •, and 𝜌 •) being replaced by their pebble coun-terparts 3. Due to the larger relative surface area of all dust grains compared to pebbles, we decide to solve Eq. 11 for dust first and only use any remaining water vapour for freeze-out and desorption of ice on pebbles.   

> 3For simplicity we assume the same internal density for pebbles and dust grains. MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 8 T. Kaeufer et al. 

2.6 Numerical implementation 

2.6.1 Spatial grid setup 

We use a logarithmically spaced grid in 𝑟 and 𝑧 for which 𝑟 𝑖 +1/𝑟 𝑖 =

1.05 and 𝑧 𝑖 +1/𝑧 𝑖 = 1.05. We model the radial region between 0.1 − 10 au which contains the water snowline for all our temperature structures. While water emission is likely to originate at closer-in regions as well, we account for this during the spectrum generation (Sect. 2.7). The disc is modelled up to 6 gas scale heights. We tested including higher disc regions but none of the results in this paper changed significantly. This is because (1) the water emission from higher disc layers is unlikely to significantly contribute to the to-tal emission due to the rapidly vertically decreasing densities and (2) water is rapidly photodissociated in the optically thin disc sur-face leading to naturally low abundances that are not replenished by chemistry above the H-H 2 transition. The lowest vertical grid point is centred at 0 .005 au and has an extended lower limit at the disc’s midplane. 

2.6.2 Boundary conditions 

The boundary conditions are reflective in the vertical ( 𝜕𝐶 𝑖 /𝜕𝑧 = 0) and radial direction ( 𝜕𝐶 𝑖 /𝜕𝑟 = 0) for all modelled species (including pebbles). Consequently, diffusion does not change the total mass in the modelled region. However, we allow for advection to remove ma-terial through the inner boundary of the simulation and add material at the outer edge as well. This transparency of the radial boundaries is enforced by refilling the boundary cells with the material they exchange through advection with their adjacent cells. 

2.6.3 Time step 

The model evolution is done using a finite-difference method based on an evolving time step Δ𝑡 . This time step is adjusted during the simulation based on Δ𝑡 new on the maximum expected concentration change of all evolved species in every grid cell and the maximum surface density change. We only allow for 10 % of material from every cell to change location per time step by introducing a factor 𝑓 c = 0.1that decreases the time step. After initialising Δ𝑡 as 𝑓 c × Δ𝑡 new , for every time step with 𝑓 c × Δ𝑡 new > Δ𝑡 , the simulation is evolved for 

Δ𝑡 , which is subsequently increased by 5 %. If 𝑓 c × Δ𝑡 new < Δ𝑡 , the simulation evolves for 𝑓 c × Δ𝑡 new , with Δ𝑡 being decreased by 5 % for the next time step. This algorithm results in a smooth change of time steps with drastic decrease if the concentration/surface density changes are too high for the cell’s concentration/surface densities. In practise this results in typical time steps on the order of ∼ 10 days if all evolutionary processes are included, which can increase to values up to a few years in the chemistry-only case without any dynamics 4. All simulations run for 1 Myr. We deem this time sufficient to examine all the processes with their shorter timescales. 

2.7 Simulated observations 

Based on the water density structure at any given time step we sim-ulate mid-IR water spectra as seen by JWST/MIRI. To do so, we use the Dust Continuum Kit with Line Emission from Gas (DuCKLinG; Kaeufer et al. 2024). This tool uses a large temperature and column       

> 4If only chemistry is considered the time step is in most cases given by 𝑓 𝑐
> times the photodissociation timescale introduced in Section 2.4, which acts as a natural maximum possible timestep.
> Figure 4. Sketch of the slab parameter extraction from the 2D disc structure. The emission is modelled using a radial series of slab models, each repre-senting one grid point using the slab area, column density to 𝜏 IR =1 in the mid-IR and the mass averaged temperature in that visible column.

density grid of Local thermodynamic equilibrium (LTE) slab mod-els (Arabhavi et al. 2024) based on data from the HITRAN 2020 database (Gordon et al. 2022). The slab models include line overlap, are convolved with an approximate MIRI resolution ( 𝑅 = 3000), and rebinned to a typical MIRI wavelength grid. We use DuCKLinG to efficiently interpolate in this grid and calculate the flux for any given combination of temperature, column density, and emitting area. While slab models use many simplifications, it has been shown that when using multiple slab models fluxes from complex 2D den-sity structures can be sufficiently approximated (Kaeufer et al. 2024; Vlasblom et al. 2025). Therefore, we use one slab model for every radial grid point in our 2D density structure (Fig. 4). The emitting area corresponds directly to the area of the annulus represented by the radial grid cell position. The column density to which JWST/MIRI is sensitive includes all water vapour above the 𝜏 IR = 1 line. This line evolves with changes of the dust density and is evaluated using a dust opacity of 5 × 10 3 cm 2/g (roughly matching the opacity calculated with optool at 10 𝜇 m as described in Sect. 2.4). From this observ-able water column, the mass averaged temperature is calculated to complete the set of three parameters needed by a 0D slab model to simulate the water flux. All these 0D slab model fluxes are then added to derive the total mid-IR water spectrum. Instead of analysing the full water spectrum, a small selection of well understood unblended water lines and their ratios can also be used to analyse the water emission coming from a disc (Banzatti et al. 2025). Therefore, we extract the same quantities from our simulated spectra. For doing so, the fluxes of the lines introduced by Banzatti et al. (2025) are integrated and their ratios calculated (more details in Sect. 4). 

2.8 Grid of models 

While a full parameter exploration is beyond the scope of this paper, we set up a small grid of four main models to explore the effect of different included processes on the 2D water density structure and simulated observations. These models are listed in Table 3 with their  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 9                                                  

> Table 3. Grid of models. The individual columns denote which processes are included in the model. Model Chemistry Diffusion/ Advection Coagulation/ fragmentation Pebble drift/ Pebble diffusion Results
> Main models
> C(hemistry) ✓Sect. 3.1 C+D(iffusion & advection) ✓✓Sect. 3.2 C+D+Co(agulation & fragmentation) ✓✓✓Sect. 3.3 C+D+Co+Dr(ift & pebble diffusion) ✓✓✓✓Sect. 3.4
> Supporting models
> C+D with 𝛼 =10 −4✓✓Sect. 3.2 C+D+Co+Dr with 2 ×𝑣 Drift ✓✓✓✓Sect. 3.4 C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 Drift /2✓✓✓✓Sect. 3.4 C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag =2.5−5 m /s✓✓✓✓Sect. 3.4 C+D+Dr ✓✓✓Sect. 3.4

included processes. All parameters that are the same for all models are listed in the parameter table (Table 1). This means that these models are initialised with the same underlying gas, dust, water, CO, H 2, oxygen, and pebble density structure (even if pebbles are not used during the model’s evolution). While model C+D+Co+Dr includes all processes, the model without pebble drift and diffusion (model C+D+Co) can be interpreted as a model with negligible pebble flux. Similarly, model C+D+Co simplifies into model C+D if the Stokes number of large grains is smaller than 𝛼 . In that case, no settled large dust grains exist, leaving only diffusion, advection, and chemistry to determine the 2D water density structure. Lastly, if the turbulence in a disc is low, model C+D can be approximated by model C. In this case all dynamical timescales are longer than the chemical timescales. We evolved five further models in addition to the set of four main models. These evaluate the influence of the 𝛼 parameter (Sect. 3.2), drift velocity (Sect. 3.4), changing fragmentation velocity (Sect. 3.4) and the feedback loop between coagulation/fragmentation and pebble drift (Sect. 3.4). 

3 THE EFFECT OF DIFFERENT PROCESSES ON WATER CONCENTRATIONS 

In this section, we highlight the influence of different processes on the 2D water density and 1D surface density structure. We start with the static chemical model (model C), add diffusion and advection (model C+D), add coagulation and fragmentation (model C+D+Co), and finally pebble drift and diffusion (model C+D+Co+Dr). All mod-els are listed in Table 3. 

3.1 Chemical processing of water (model C) 

The evolution by gas phase water formation and photodissociation of the static chemistry model without dynamics (model C) is depicted in Fig. 5. The left panels show the initial conditions (panels 1a-5a). H2O (vapour (1a) plus ice (2a)) and oxygen (panel 3a) are initialized as a constant abundance throughout the model (see Sect. 2.4). The snowline, which is defined as equal water vapour and ice densities (for a discussion on different definitions see Calahan et al. 2026), separates the two water phases. While water ice does practically not exist inside the water snowline (panel 2a) a low fraction of water vapour exists beyond the snowline (panel 1a, equivalent to 𝜌 sat in Eq. 11). No OH exists at the beginning of our simulation (panel 4a) as it is exclusively formed via water photodissociation in our simu-lation. The initial H 3+ abundance (panel 5a) decreases in water-rich regions due to H 3+ destruction via water (Fig. A3). This means that at the initial conditions H 3+ is more abundant at higher disc layers especially outside the water snowline. Nevertheless, the peak abun-dance of H 3+ is very low at about 10 −13 . We show in Appendix A that the H 3+ abundance increase is largely driven by the decrease in total gas density and consistent with previously found behaviour of H 3+ in the interstellar medium (Oka 2013). Therefore, gas-phase water formation via H 3+ is more important in less massive discs. When photodissociation and gas-phase water formation are given time ( > 0.1 Myr) to influence the molecular abundances (column b and c of Fig. 5) stark changes in abundances can be noted. Photodis-sociation reacts on very short timescales and therefore reduces the amount of water vapour (panel 1b) in the UV exposed layer early on. In the inner region, this photodissociated water transforms into OH (panel 4b) which provides its own UV opacity leading to a constant overall UV opacity in the inner region over time (e.g. panel 4b and 4c). Outside of the 𝑇 = 400 K contour, an increasingly large fraction of water is photodissociated into O instead of OH (panel 3b), which does not contribute to the UV opacity leading to a lowering of the 

𝜏 UV = 1-line. Therefore, in these regions the dust opacity (compare e.g. panel 3b of Fig. 5 to Fig. 3) dominates. Additionally, lowering the amount of water in the disc surface leads to an increase in the H 3+ abundance (panel 5b and 5c). Both the increase in O and H 3+ result in higher production rates of wa-ter through gas-phase chemistry (Reaction 20). Below the 𝜏 UV = 1line photodissociation plays a minimal role, leading to an effective transformation of O into H 2O (panels 3b and 3c). This reaction is faster outside the snowline due to lack of gas-phase water which would reduce the H 3+ abundance. This can be seen in panel 3c that shows the strongest O depletion beyond the water snowline. Addi-tionally, the oxygen abundance decreases around the 𝜏 UV = 1 line close to 400 K. This is due to the constant water production in this region, which is quickly photodissociated (mainly into OH instead of O). We note that the upper boundary of this region consists of the H/H 2-transition. This specific artifact is attributed to the limitations imposed by our semi-analytical chemistry network (e.g. the temper-ature limit for cold water formation) and is not expected to show up in models using full chemical networks. However, the water abun-dance in this region, which is the main subject of this study, does not follow this trend which leaves us to accept the oxygen behaviour as a necessary and inconsequential effect of the model’s simplification. The chemically produced H 2O vapour can be seen below the 𝜏 UV =

1 line at temperatures below 400 K (panel 1c). Additionally, panel 2c  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 10 T. Kaeufer et al.  

> Figure 5. The chemical evolution of water in model C (row one of Table 3) . Every column depicts a different time during the evolution (initial conditions, 0.1 Myr, and 1 Myr) of the water abundance (top row), water ice abundance (second row), oxygen abundance (third row), OH abundance (fourth row), and H 3+
> abundance (last row). The snowline, temperature contours and opacity lines are shown for reference.

shows that produced water vapour outside the snowline freezes out quickly, resulting in higher ice abundances compared to the initial conditions. While all water above the 𝜏 UV = 1 line at temperatures larger than 400 K is photodissociated, the water production is acting against this destruction at colder regions. Therefore, H 2O exists at abundances of ∼ 10 −6 above the snow surface (panel 1b and 1c). This coincides with the strong reduction in ice abundance above the 𝜏 UV =

1 line (panel 2b). In this region water vapour is photodissociated, resulting in a redistribution of ice and vapour in that region, which results in a net ice loss. We note that the water abundance above the snow surface is very sensitive to the photodissociation rate. In case of higher UV fields, the balance between chemical water formation and photodissociation results in lower water abundances in the disc surface (e.g. Vlasblom et al. 2025; Calahan et al. 2026). Similarly, increases in photodes-orption rates reduce the ice abundance in the surface. To summarise, in the absence of any dynamics, the chemical net-work leads to (1) a photodissociated surface layer in which water is depleted, (2) a layer of OH that, together with water self-shielding, and dust shielding protects the lower water reservoir from photodis- 

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 11 

sociation, (3) an increase of water vapour and ice in regions outside 400 K through cold water formation, and (4) a tail of ∼ 10 −6 water abundance above the snow surface produced via constant photodis-sociation and water formation. These seen water reservoirs generally align with the abundances retrieved from complex thermochemical models (e.g. van Dishoeck et al. 2013; Woitke et al. 2024; Vlasblom et al. 2025). For example, Fig. D.1 in Arabhavi et al. (2024) depicts a similar low abundance water vapour reservoir above the midplane water reservoir for a grid of 25 thermochemical models. This means that even though our sim-ple chemical approach does not capture all details of thermochemical models, it reproduces the key pathways for water formation and de-struction while allowing us to add various dynamical processes. 

3.2 The interplay between chemistry and diffusion (model C+D) 

Next, we are examining how adding diffusion and advection to the chemical processing (model C+D; second row in Table 3) changes the 2D abundances (Fig. 6). Generally, diffusion acts to reduce con-centration gradients leading to increases in regions of low concen-tration, and vice versa in regions of high concentration if the diffu-sion timescale is smaller than the chemical reprocessing (Semenov & Wiebe 2011). This can be seen most dramatically for oxygen (panel 2a-2c of Fig. 6). While the regions with temperatures too high for gas-phase cold water formation stayed unaffected when includ-ing chemistry only (compare to Fig. 5), the oxygen abundances in these regions change due to the inclusion of diffusion (panel 2c). The abundances decrease steadily over time because of ongoing water formation in the cold regions. The only region that shows a strong O abundance gradient after 1 Myr (panel 2c) sits above the 𝜏 UV = 1 line where (1) water is continuously destroyed leading to an increase of oxygen and (2) at least partly H 2 does not exist stopping the oxygen destruction via cold water formation. However, this region which is still shaped by e.g. vertical diffusion (panel 2b and 2c), but retains a strong concentration gradient. While the peak OH abundances in the chemistry only model is confined to the warm regions of the disc surface, gas dynamics re-distribute OH leading to a vertical and radial spread (panel 3b). The vertical extent that OH exists below the 𝜏 UV = 1 line depends on the ratio of the vertical diffusion timescale and the assumed timescale for the OH to H 2O reaction. We note that the assumed timescale decreases the OH abundance to < 10 −8 at 𝑧 /𝑟 = 0.1. Therefore, the back reaction fulfils the attempted purpose of stopping a large OH build-up near the midplane. Shortening the timescale further would only marginally change the vertical location of OH-produced water, which quickly diffuses vertically. The radial spread means that the UV opacity increases outside of the 𝑇 = 400 K contour which leads to a decrease in water photodissociation. The water abundance in the disc surface is significantly increased by the inclusion of dynamics compared to the chemistry only case. As seen in panel 1b, diffusion acts against the constant water destruc-tion which increases the abundance in these regions. This is consis-tent with several studies showing that adding a vertical mixing term to (thermo)chemical models significantly increases the water abun-dance in the disc surface (Furuya et al. 2013; Woitke et al. 2022). Also, water is efficiently retained close to the snowline in the surface layer (panel 1b). This water reservoir originates from sublimating water ice. While in regions further from the disc surface ice diffusion at the snowline is matched by an equal water vapour diffusion into icy regions, the removal of water vapour from the disc surface means that sublimating ice now efficiently supplies the gas-phase. In summary, adding diffusion to a chemical model (1) reduces abundance gradients for all dynamically evolving species and (2) leads to higher water abundances in the photodissociation region (especially close to the water snowline). 

3.2.1 The impact of the 𝛼 -parameter 

The extent and strength of the water enhancement in the surface depends on the ratio between the (local) dynamics (diffusion and advection) and the chemistry timescale, which Semenov & Wiebe (2011) define as the Damköhler number Da. If Da ≫ 1 chemical evolution is fast and dynamical effects are negligible. On the other hand, Da ≲ 1 means that the concentration is sensitive to dynamical processes. The dynamical timescale and therefore Da is sensitive to the chemical timescales and the disc turbulence controlled by 

𝛼 . Therefore, different photodissociation rates and 𝛼 values lead to strong changes of the water concentration in the disc surface (e.g. Furuya et al. 2013). In the following, we test the impact of different 𝛼 values with a full exploration of different chemical timescales beyond the scope of this work. Fig. 7 compares the fiducial case of model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −3

with another model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4 (first supporting model in Table 3). We compare these models at 0 .1 Myr since Fig. 6 shows that the balance between diffusion and photodissociation is established at that time already. A lowering of 𝛼 reduces the strength of diffusion, which in turn results in lower water abundances in the surface layer. While the warm disc surface ( 𝑇 > 400 K) exhibits concentration reductions within factors of ∼ 10, the cold surface shows reductions by more than a factor of ∼ 10 5. This is generally consistent with Woitke et al. (2022), who showed that including vertical diffusion with 𝛼 = 10 −3 can enhance the water concentration in the disc surface at a radius of 10 au by more than 6 dex. Lastly, we note that the water concentration close to the midplane (below about 𝜏 UV = 1) is higher (within a factor < 10) for model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4. This is because this water efficiently diffuses into the low concentration regions in the 𝛼 = 10 −3 case while being retained at lower 𝛼 .The Damköhler number describes the balance between chemi-cal and dynamical evolution. Therefore, changes to the chemical timescale can lead to similar concentration changes as discussed in the case of changing 𝛼 values. Increasing the photodissociation rate (e.g. due to a stronger UV field) increases Da which minimises the impact of vertical diffusion to increase water concentration in the disc surface. 

3.3 Effect of non-drifting pebbles on water distributions (model C+D+Co) 

This section examines the effect of coagulation and fragmentation between dust grains and non-drifting (vertically settled) pebbles on the density structure (model C+D+Co; row three in Table 3). While the previous models already included pebbles, they did not participate in any evolution. In model C+D+Co, we start with start with ice on pebbles as well instead of the dry pebbles initialised earlier. Ices are distributed iteratively by (1) calculating the vapour to ice on dust grain equilibrium (Eq. 11), (2) redistributing the ices between pebbles and dust grains to enforce the same surface density ratio as seen between dust grains and pebbles, and (3) repeating this process to an equilibrium state. The C+D+Co model is then evolved using chemistry, dynamics (advection and diffusion), coagulation and fragmentation, but cru-cially without radial movement of pebbles (no pebble drift and 1D radial diffusion).  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 12 T. Kaeufer et al.  

> Figure 6. The chemical and dynamical evolution of water in model C+D (second row of Table 3). Every column depicts a different time during the evolution (initial conditions, 0 .1 Myr, and 1 Myr) of the water abundance (top row), oxygen abundance (second row), and OH abundance (last row). The snowline, temperature contours and opacity lines are shown for reference.

The evolution of the surface densities is shown in panels a of Fig. 8. The surface density of pebbles and dust grains does only change marginally over time owing to the fact that the simulation is initialised with an equilibrium distribution (panel 1a). As explained in Sect. 2.5, we assume a dust to pebble surface density ratio of 1 /3(Eq. 34). The only marginal temporal changes are due to the 2D advection velocity field that affects dust grains leading to a minimal decrease of both dust and pebble surface density at small radii (as tentatively seen in panel 1a of Fig. 8). Both ice on pebbles and ice on dust grains show an increase in surface density outside of ∼ 0.6 au (roughly the midplane snowline) with a strong depletion just inside of that. The corresponding 2D ice on dust grain concentration can be seen in panel 2a-2d of Fig. 9. Ices in the surface are quickly removed due to photodissociation of water vapour (as already seen in Fig. 6). The increase of ice on dust grain concentration (e.g. panel 2c and 2d of Fig. 9) is due to cold water formation and subsequent condensation (as discussed in Sect. 3.1). Additionally, the lower concentration of ice on dust grains compared to water vapour inside the snowline 5 leads to a radial outwards (cold finger effect) and vertical downwards diffusion of water vapour which increases the ice on dust grain concentration over timescales of ∼ 1 Myr (panel 2d). The water vapour concentration in the cold disc surface decreases  

> 5This is a consequence of the initialisation with part of the ice being captured on pebbles.

quickly due to photodissociation (e.g. panel 1b of Fig. 9) as already seen in the previous models, which leads to a drop in UV opacity (panel 2b). Additionally, vapour above the ice region but below the 

𝜏 UV = 1 line is depleted. This is due to the vertical cold finger ef-fect, with ice being captured by pebbles in the midplane leading to a vertical downwards diffusion of vapour in the surface (e.g. Meijerink et al. 2009; Krijt et al. 2016; Du et al. 2017). After 1 Myr of evolu-tion, radial diffusion minimised the radial concentration gradient and repopulates this depleted region (panel 1d of Fig. 9). This can be seen as well in panel 2a of Fig. 8, where the water vapour surface den-sity is initially decreasing outside the snowline but increases slowly between 0 .01 − 1 Myr. This comes with the consequent decrease in vapour surface density inside the snowline. To summarise, adding coagulation and fragmentation of dust grains and non-drifting pebbles to the simulation (1) leads to the a reduction of water vapour above the ice reservoir due to the ver-tical cold finger effect, which (2) is replenished by radial diffusion on longer ( ∼ 1 Myr) timescales, leading to (3) a decrease of water surface density inside the midplane snowline. 

3.4 Effect of pebble drift on water distributions (model C+D+Co+Dr) 

The full model C+D+Co+Dr (row four of Table 3) adds pebble drift and pebble diffusion to the previously discussed chemical, diffu-sion/advection, and coagulation/fragmentation processes. The influx of pebbles at the outer edge of the simulations matches  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 13 0.1 1 90.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 

> z/r

0.1 Myr             

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Water vapour (= 10 3)
> a0.1 190.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Water vapour (= 10 4)
> b0.1 19

r [au]     

> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Difference c-6.0 -5.5 -5.0 -4.5 -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5
> log 10  ( water / gas )
> -6.0 -5.5 -5.0 -4.5 -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5
> log 10  ( water / gas )
> -4.5 -3.0 -1.5 0.0 1.5 3.0 4.5
> log 10  ( water,  3/ water,  4)

Figure 7. The water vapour concentration in model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −3

(panel a) and 𝛼 = 10 −4 (model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4, panel b) at 0 .1 Myr. The difference between those models is shown in panel c. The overplotted contours in all difference panels are taken from the initial conditions. The horizontal lines in panels a and b show the emitting regions of the diagnostic water lines (more details in Sect. 4) and far-IR lines (more details in Sect. 5.3). 

the drift flux from the outermost to the adjacent cell at the beginning of the simulation and is kept constant over time (details in Sect. 2.5). The assumptions lead to a pebble flux of ∼ 2.4 × 10 −4 M⊕ /yr, which is similar to values derived from cold water lines in JWST/MIRI spectra (e.g. Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Krijt et al. 2025), 1D dust evolution models (e.g. Birnstiel et al. 2012; Drążkowska et al. 2021), and the pebble flux needed to explain dust and CO observations of IM Lup (Bosman et al. 2023). We choose to keep this influx from the outer disc constant throughout the simulation for simplicity 6, and leave the implementation of more complex time dependent pebble flux profiles to future studies. The surface density evolution of model C+D+Co+Dr can be seen  

> 6

A constant pebble flux based on the initial drift velocity in the outer most cell results after 1 Myr in a total accreted pebble mass ( ∼ 6.5 × 10 −4 M⊙ ) that exceeds the available solid mass of the disc (2 × 10 −4 M⊙ ). However, we see that the simulation establishes a quasi-equilibrium already at about 0 .2 Myr at which point the accreted mass has not yet exceeded the total available reservoir. Therefore, the 1 Myr snapshots can be seen as the drift equilibrium case where only chemical water formation alters the water density structure. 

in the panel 1b and 2b of Fig. 8. First of all, we note that the inward drift of pebbles increases the surface density of pebbles at small radii. This leads to a steeper slope of the pebble surface density matching (within 0 .5 %) the analytic prediction of ΣP ∝ 𝑟 −0.75 in the frag-mentation limited case (Birnstiel et al. 2012). While the increase in pebble surface density is a direct consequence of drift, the dust grain surface density increases as well due to the constant fragmentation of pebbles. Fig. 10 shows the 2D water vapour concentration, ice on dust grains concentration, and dust concentration. Panels 3a-3d show how the dust concentration increases at small radii (e.g. panel 3c). The increase in dust concentration leads to a small increase in dust opacity in the inner disc. Generally, no strong vertical gradients ex-ists in the dust concentration. Only at 0 .01 Myr (panel 3b) a vertical gradient is visible around 1 au. This confirms that vertical diffusion acts very quickly in minimising concentration gradients in the inner disc (see e.g. Fig 2 in Semenov & Wiebe 2011). The water vapour concentration (panels 1a-1d of Fig. 10) shows strong changes compared to the already discussed chemical and dy-namical effects. In-drifting pebbles release their water vapour inside the snowline (panel 1b), which quickly diffuses vertically upwards in the observable surface layer. In the regions with most water en-hancement, the UV opacity increases significantly (e.g. panel 3b) due to water UV shielding (e.g. Bosman et al. 2022). Through radial diffusion this concentration peak is spreading radially as well (e.g. panel 1b), with the disc region inside the water snowline reaching a nearly constant concentration after 1 Myr (panel 1c). This new con-centration is about 50 − 60 its initial value (see panel 2b of Fig. 8), consistent with enhancements found using 1D models (see e.g. Fig. 6 in Schneider & Bitsch 2021). Cuzzi & Zahnle (2004) show us-ing simplified 1D model that for constant pebble flux, the steady state enhancement factor inside the snowline can be approximates as 𝐸 increase ≈ 2 𝑓 L/( 3𝛼 ), with 𝑓 L denoting the mass ratio between all large and small solids (1 /3 in our models) and 𝛼 denoting the 𝛼 

parameter (10 −3 in model C+D+Co+Dr). This equation predicts an enhancement factor of ∼ 200, which is only a factor of ∼ 4 larger than the actual enhancement of 50 − 60. The difference might originate from several model differences, including the different between 1D and 2D models. Additionally, Cuzzi & Zahnle (2004) approximate the timescale on which constant enhancement is reached as (40 /𝛼 )

orbital periods. Using the orbital period at the midplane snowline this estimate of ∼ 0.05 Myr matches the actual timescale which is between 0 .01 − 0.1 Myr (see panel 2b of Fig. 8). While the region in-side the water snowline shows a constant enhancement, the outward movement of vapour is much slower. After 0 .1 Myr, the concentration above the ice region below the photodissociation region has a water concentration comparable to the initial value (compare panel 1a and 1c of Fig. 10), recovering from the slight drop due to the vertical cold-finger effect (panel 1b). Even at 1 Myr (panel 1d) the water concentration does not increase significantly. This means that there is no strong enhancement in water concentration even though the water surface density inside the snowline has increased by a factor of 50 − 60. The influx of icy pebbles leads to a buildup of ice on dust grains as well. Ice on dust accumulates at the sublimation front (panel 2c of Fig. 10 and panel 2b of Fig. 8) and shows the same radial slope as the dust and pebble surface density. This means that more and more ice on dust grains exists inside the initial snowline (defined as equal vapour and ice concentration) due to the fact that the saturation concentration is reached and extra water remains as ices. The ice on pebble surface density (panel 2b of Fig. 8) shows the same behaviour due to the constant exchange between dust and pebbles via coagulation and fragmentation. 

MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) 14 T. Kaeufer et al. 2

> 02
> log 10  ( /gcm  2)

C+D+Co 

> 1a

C+D+Co+Dr             

> Surface density: log 10 (dust )
> log 10 (peb )
> log 10 (ice, peb )
> log 10 (ice, dust )
> log 10 (water )
> Time: 0.0 Myr 0.01 Myr 0.1 Myr 1.0 Myr 1b 1b 1b 0.2 110

r [au]   

> 2
> 02
> log 10  ( /gcm  2) 2a 0.2 110

r [au]   

> 2 × vDrift 2b
> vDrift /2 2b 2b

Figure 8. Evolution of surface densities for model C+D+Co (left panels) and model C+D+Co+Dr (right panels). The different colours correspond to different surface densities with the dust, pebble, ice on pebbles, ice on dust grains, and water vapour surface density depicted in blue, orange, green, purple, and brown, respectively. The upper panels show all solids while the lower panels depict all water surface densities. The initial conditions (faint lines) are the same for all models. The surface densities at 0 .01 Myr (dotted line), 0 .1 Myr (dashed line) and 1 Myr (solid line) are displayed as well. The black lines in panel 2b depict the end state water surface density for the supporting models with half and double the fiducial drift velocity (see Table 3). 

Figure 9. The dynamical evolution of water in the model C+D+Co (row three of Table 3). Every column depicts a different time during the evolution (initial conditions, 0 .01 Myr, 0 .1 Myr, and 1 Myr) of the water vapour concentration (top row), water ice concentration (last row). The snowline, temperature contours and opacity lines are shown for reference. 

The influence of pebble drift on water vapour can be seen in panels 4 of Fig. 10, which compares the 2D water concentra-tion of two identical models that only differ in their inclusion (model C+D+Co+Dr) and exclusion (model C+D+Co) of pebble drift. After 0 .01 Myr the vertically well mixed plume of water at the water snowline enhances the water concentration in the drift model compared to model C+D+Co by factors of 10 (panel 4b). This en-hancement spreads inwards leading to a water concentration inside the water snowline about a factor of 60 higher in the drift case com-pared to the no drift case at 1 Myr (panel 4d). However, above the snow surface the concentrations look very similar with changes of less than 0 .25 dex (panel 4d). Only the shift of the snowline at the outermost region leads to a ∼ 1 dex change in water concentration. We discuss the observational signatures of this behaviour in Sect. 4. 

3.4.1 The effect of different pebble fluxes 

To test the effect of different pebble fluxes, we set up two supporting models with half and double the drift velocity (Table 3). Since the pebble influx is linked to the drift velocity, this results in pebble fluxes of ∼ 1.2 × 10 −4 M⊕ /yr and ∼ 4.8 × 10 −4 M⊕ /yr, respectively. The 2D water concentration, ice on dust grain concentration, and small grain concentration at 0 .1 Myr can be seen in panels a and b of Fig. 11. For double and half the fragmentation velocity compared to model C+D+Co+Dr the water concentration inside the midplane snowline is enhanced and reduced, respectively (panels 4). This is also shown by the quasi-steady water vapour surface densities (at 1 Myr) for these two models in panel 2b of Fig. 8. In the inner disc region ( 𝑟 ≲ 0.5 au)the water surface densities decreases (for 𝑣 Drift /2) and increases (for 2 ×𝑣 Drift ) by a factor of 2, confirming the suggested linear relation between enhancement inside the midplane snowline 

MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 15 0.1 1 90.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 

> z/r

0.0 Myr       

> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Water vapour 1a 0.1 19

0.01 Myr     

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 1b Vertically diff. sublimated ice Radial spread 0.1 19

0.1 Myr     

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 1c No strong enhancement 0.1 19

1.0 Myr                                         

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 1d No cold water changes 0.1 190.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Ice on dust 2a 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 2b 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 2c Accumulation at sublimation front 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 2d Opacity increase 0.1 190.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Dust 3a 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 3b Increase of UV-opacity 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 3c Increase at inner regions 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 3d 0.1 19

r [au]      

> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Water vapour comparison with C+D+Co 4a 0.1 19

r [au]     

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 4b 0.1 19

r [au]     

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 4c 0.1 19

r [au]   

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 4d -6.0 -5.5 -5.0 -4.5 -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5
> log 10  ( water / gas )
> -5.0 -4.5 -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5
> log 10  ( ice / gas )
> -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5
> log 10  ( dust / gas )
> -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> log 10  ( C + D + Co + Dr / C + D + Co )

Figure 10. The dynamical evolution of water in the full model C+D+Co+Dr (fourth row of Table 3). Every column depicts a different time during the evolution (initial conditions, 0 .01 Myr, 0 .1 Myr, and 1 Myr) of the water vapour concentration (top row), water ice concentration (second row), dust concentration (third row). The last row shows the ratio in water vapour concentration between model C+D+Co+Dr and model C+D+Co. The horizontal lines in panels 4 show (top to bottom) the emitting regions in model C+D+Co+Dr of the diagnostic water lines (more details in Sect. 4) and far-IR lines at 40 .69 𝜇 m ( 𝐸 U = 550 K), at 46 .48 𝜇 m ( 𝐸 U = 410 K), and at 61 .81 𝜇 m ( 𝐸 U = 552 K). The snowline, temperature contours and opacity lines are shown for reference. 

and pebble flux (Cuzzi & Zahnle 2004). However, the surface density profiles outside of ∼ 0.5 au are nearly identical (as also shown by panels 4a and 4b of Fig. 11), showing that the lack of water vapour increase outside the midplane snowline is independent in our setup of the assumed drift velocity and pebble flux. This is a somewhat surprising result and we briefly explore why this behaviour is seen. 

3.4.2 The pebble conveyor belt effect 

Assuming that the vertical diffusion is faster than the radial gas trans-port, sublimated water will be well mixed vertically on the radial diffusion timescale. This means that water vapour that moves outside the midplane snowline will (at least partly) freeze out as ice on dust grains. These grains can coagulate in the midplane transferring the ice onto pebbles. Additionally, vapour can also directly freeze out on pebbles in the midplane if it reaches that region. Due to the constant and fast inwards drift of pebbles (compared to radial outwards dif-fusion), water is effectively moved back into warmer regions where it will sublimate again. Therefore, outwards diffusing vapour in the disc surface is trapped in a cycle that reduces its efficiency. This effect is reminiscent of small grains becoming trapped in the midplane or pressure bumps if the collision timescale is shorter than the diffusion timescale (Krijt & Ciesla 2016; Yang et al. 2025). To test this scenario, we evolve model C+D+Dr (see Table 3), which mimics model C+D+Co+Dr in every aspect but does not al-low for coagulation and fragmentation, effectively limiting the ability of dust and pebbles to exchange ice reservoirs. Physically, this sce-nario could correspond to a picture where dust coagulation is halted by bouncing rather than fragmentation (e.g. Zsom et al. 2010; Do-minik & Dullemond 2024). The 2D concentration structure of water vapour, ice on dust grains, and dust concentration at 0 .1 Myr is shown in panels d of Fig. 11. Similarly to model C+D+Co+Dr, pebbles subli-mate inside the snowline leading to an enhancement of water vapour. However, not allowing for coagulation breaks the aforementioned cycle, which has been seen in model C+D+Co+Dr. Therefore, effi-cient outwards diffusion can be seen for vapour (panel 1d) and ice on dust grains (panel 2d). This leads to efficient concentration en-hancement of cold water above the ice reservoir and a corresponding strong increase in ice on dust grain concentration. This shows that the cycle including coagulation and pebble drift is responsible for the lack of outwards diffusion in model C+D+Co+Dr. Therefore, it likely matters if dust is models with discrete size bins or as full size distributions. 

MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) 16 T. Kaeufer et al. 0.1 1 90.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4                                                            

> z/r
> C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × vfrag at 0.1 Myr
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Water vapour 1a 0.1 19C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag /2
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 1b 0.1 19C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag = 2.5 5m/s
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 1c Radially confined plume 0.1 19C+D+Dr
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 1d Radial spread outwards 0.1 190.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Ice on dust 2a 0.1 19
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 2b 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 2c 0.1 19UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 2d Inside out increase 0.1 190.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Dust 3a 0.1 19
> UV = 1 IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 3b 0.1 19
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 3c More small grains at inner regions 0.1 19UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 3d No strong change 0.1 19

r [au]     

> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4
> z/r
> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> Water vapour comparison with C+D+Co+Dr 4a Higher concentration compared to normal drift 0.1 19

r [au]     

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 4b Lower concentration compared to normal drift 0.1 19

r [au]     

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 4c 0.1 19

r [au]   

> UV = 1
> IR = 1
> 150 K 200 K 400 K 600 K 800 K Snowline
> 4d -5.5 -4.5 -3.5 -2.5 -1.5 -0.5
> log 10  ( water / gas )
> -5.0 -4.5 -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5
> log 10  ( ice / gas )
> -4.0 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0
> log 10  ( dust / gas )
> -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
> log 10  ( model / C + D + Co + Dr )

Figure 11. The dynamical evolution in all support models including diverse pebble drift scenarios (see Table 3). Every column depicts a different different model at 0 .1 Myr with panels 1 showing model C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × 𝑣 frag , panels 2 showing model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag /2, panels 3 showing model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag = 2.5 − 5 m /s, and panels 4 showing model C+D+Dr. The water vapour concentration (top row), water ice concentration (second row), dust concentration (third row) are displayed. The last row shows the ratio in water vapour concentration between the column’s model and model C+D+Co+Dr. The snowline, temperature contours and opacity lines are shown for reference, with all contours in the row d taken from model C+D+Co+Dr. 

3.4.3 The effect of changing fragmentation velocity 

Lastly, we explore the effect of changing dust properties for dry and wet pebbles. Several studies highlight the change in fragmentation velocity for pebbles if they are dry or covered by an icy mantel (e.g. Dominik & Tielens 1997; Gundlach & Blum 2015). As shown by Houge et al. (2025) a decrease in fragmentation velocity inside the water snowline leads to an increase in the concentration of small grains which in turn increases the dust opacity in this region. There-fore, Houge et al. (2025) stress that this effect leads to a constant observable water column density despite ongoing pebble drift. We explore this scenario by halving the fragmentation velocity (from 5 m /s to 2 .5 m /s) at radii where ratio between ice on pebble and pebble surface density exceeds 0 .01. We note that this change by a factor of 2 is quite conservative with Houge et al. (2025) exploring changes by a factor of 10. However, we leave a full exploration on different factors to future studies and focus on the qualitative results. The model concentrations at 0 .1 Myr are shown in panels c of Fig. 11. The plume of water is radially more confined compared to model C+D+Co+Dr (panel 1c of Fig. 10). This is due to the change in drift velocity which is connected to the fragmentation velocity via Eq. 29 and Eq. 31. According to these equations dry pebbles drift slower than wet pebbles leading to a traffic jam effect at the water snowline. Therefore, the radial region in which ice sublimates gets more confined. As a consequence, the water concentration above this region becomes enhances (panel 4c of Fig. 11). Another consequence of the changing fragmentation velocity is an increase in the dust/pebble ratio. The surface density ratio changes proportional to the inverse square root of the fragmentation velocity ratio according to Eq. 34. Additionally, the aforementioned traffic jam leads to a sharp change in the surface density profiles in both dust and pebbles (Fig. B2). We explore the effect on the observable water reservoir in Sect. 4. We conclude that drift of icy pebbles in combination with chem-istry, diffusion and advection, and coagulation and fragmentation results (for our choice of 𝛼 and pebble properties) in (1) an enhance-ment of water vapour inside the water snowline via sublimating pebbles, which is vertically distributed on short timescales, and (2) radial transport processes spreading the water plume mostly inwards, which therefore results in little enhancement of the observable cold water region compared to an identical model without drift. This is surprising given the proposed observational relation between the strength of cold water excess and pebble drift. We also note that (3) the efficiency of radial outwards transport of water is hampered by 

MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 17 

a cycle of radial and vertical diffusion, freeze out, coagulation, and inwards drift, (4) the UV opacity increasing due to the increase in water vapour with an small increase of the IR opacity in the inner regions due to the raise of dust grains concentration, and (5) that changes in the fragmentation velocity for dry and wet pebbles con-fine the water radially and enhance the dust concentration inside the midplane snowline. 

4 SIMULATED MID-IR SPECTRA 

The 2D density structures of all models are used to simulate mid-IR spectra. This means that the changes in water density and dust den-sity can be directly linked to observable differences in JWST/MIRI spectra. For doing so, every modelled column is approximated by a slab model that accounts for the columns emitting area, observable column density in the IR, and the mass average temperature (see Fig. 4 and Sect. 2.7 for details). The extracted emitting conditions at the initial conditions, 0 .01 Myr, 0 .1 Myr, and 1 Myr for all four main models are displayed in Fig. 12. At the initial conditions (blue markers in all panels), the emit-ting column density above the dust optical surface is ∼ 10 18 .4 cm −2

for all 𝑇 ≳ 150 K with a steep drop to column densities as low as 10 15 .5 cm −2 at lower temperatures. The transitioning temperature of 

∼ 150 K corresponds to the temperature where the snowline crosses the 𝜏 IR = 1 line. Due to the constant initial water and dust concen-tration both exhibit the same vertical distribution which leads to a radially constant column density if the snowline is below the 𝜏 IR = 1line. At lower temperatures, large fractions of water in the observable region are frozen, reducing the vapour column density. 

4.1 Effect of chemical processing on mid-IR spectra (model C) 

Model C (panel a of Fig. 12) shows how chemistry leads to a strong column density decrease at low temperatures ( 𝑇 < 400 K), with only a small decrease of < 0.3 dex at high temperatures ( 𝑇 > 400 K). This decrease is due to photodissociation destroying water in the disc surface (see Sect. 3.1) and therefore dependent on the assumed photodissociation timescale and UV opacity. Water self-shielding ensures the survival of a layer of water between the 𝜏 UV = 1 and 

𝜏 IR = 1 line at 𝑇 > 400 K. Since the observable column density is dominated by the regions just above the 𝜏 IR = 1 line, photodissocia-tion only leads to a small drop in warm and hot water column density. On the other hand, photodissociation at 𝑇 < 400 K transforms water into oxygen which does not shield water from UV radiation, low-ering the 𝜏 UV = 1 line. Therefore, the column density of water at these temperatures is set by the thin layer of water between the dust 

𝜏 UV = 1 and 𝜏 IR = 1 line and the low abundance water region in the surface (see e.g. panel 1c of Fig. 5) which explains the decrease in column density of about 3 dex. Using these conditions, JWST/MIRI water spetra are simulated. Zoom-ins to the four water lines that are commonly used to char-acterise the water temperature distribution (introduced by Banzatti et al. 2025) are shown in panel 1a and 2a of Fig. 13. The spectra after 0 .01 Myr (orange), 0 .1 Myr (green), and 1 Myr (purple) are dis-played, with the hot (marked by its upper level energy 𝐸 u of 6051 K), warm ( 𝐸 u = 3645 K), and two cold ( 𝐸 u = 1447 K and 𝐸 u = 1615 K) being labelled. The two cold water lines (panel 2a) have a similar strength to the line between them (at 23 .85 𝜇 m, with 𝐸 U = 2892 K). This pattern has already been seen by Vlasblom et al. (2025) using full thermochemical models and identified as no strong cold water enhancement. The line strength evolution of the diagnostics water lines (indicated by their colour) normalised to their initial fluxes is shown in Fig. 14 for all models (indicated by the line style). The hot water line stays nearly constant over time with about 75 % of its initial flux (panel 1a in Fig. 13 and dotted red line in panel a of Fig. 14). The warm water line retrains about 65 % of its initial strength (seen by the nearly horizontal dotted orange line in panel a of Fig. 14 at 0 .65). The two cold water lines loose ∼ 75 % of their flux (panel b of Fig. 14) in line with the steep drop in column density at 𝑇 < 400 K. This (initial condition depended) drop happens already before 0 .001 Myr and is not followed by any other later major flux changes. 

4.2 Effect of diffusion and advection on mid-IR spectra (model C+D) 

Accounting for diffusion and advection together with the chemi-cal setup (model C+D) leads to very different emission conditions (panel b of Fig. 12). The column density decrease at 0 .01 Myr at 

𝑇 < 400 K due to photodissociation is much weaker (less than 0.4 dex) compared to model C with a subsequent increase of col-umn density to ∼ 10 18 .7 cm −2 beyond its initial value at 0 .1, Myr and 1 Myr. This means that the cold water lines (panel 2b of Fig. 13) increase over time. This is underpinned by Fig. 14 showing the cold water line flux dropping to 85 % of its initial value before increasing back to it at 1 Myr (panel b). The initial conditions with constant wa-ter abundances already show spectral characteristics of a strong cold water excess (details in Sect. 5.1). This should be kept in mind, when interpreting the increase in model C+D past these conditions. As discussed in Sect. 3.2.1, stronger UV fields would decrease the water concentration in the surface. Therefore, adding diffusion to a static chemical model does not necessarily lead to an increase beyond the initial column densities. However, even in a strong photodissociation case model C+D would show higher observable cold water column densities than an equivalent model C if the Damköhler number at 𝜏 IR 

is not significantly larger than 1. A similar behaviour can be seen for the warm water line, which increases stays close to its initial value (panel a). At high temperatures the column densities stay nearly con-stant, with a slight decrease at 1 Myr (panel b of Fig. 12) due to radial diffusion of vapour into colder regions. This is reflected in the hot water line (panel 1b of Fig. 13 and panel a of Fig 14) with the line dropping in flux by only about 5 , % and staying nearly constant between 0 .001 − 1 Myr. 

4.3 Effect of non-drifting pebbles on mid-IR spectra (model C+D+Co) 

For model C+D+Co, photodissociation and the vertical cold finger effect lead to a depletion (of about 1 dex) in observable column density below 400 K at 0 .01 Myr (panel c of Fig. 12). Over time radial diffusion replenishes this reservoir resulting in column densities of about 10 18 .0 cm −2 at 𝑇 < 400 K and subsequent decrease of 0 .4 dex at 𝑇 > 400 K. This is mirrored in the spectrum which shows a slow decrease in hot water line flux (panel 1c of Fig. 13) with the initial flux being retrained till about 0 .01 Myr, but dropping afterwards to about 75 % of that value. The warm water line which is more sensitive to the cold reservoir compared to the hot water lines drops by about 30 % of flux at 0 .1 Myr, with a subsequent increase to 75 %. The cold water lines (panel 2c of Fig. 13) decrease to about 60 % of their initial flux at 0 .01 Myr, but rise again to more than 70 % at 1 Myr (panel b of Fig. 14). The impact of adding pebbles can be seen when comparing  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 18 T. Kaeufer et al. 200 400 600 800 1000 

T [K] 

> 16 18 20 22
> log 10  N [cm  2]

Model C     

> 0.0 Myr 0.01 Myr 0.1 Myr 1.0 Myr aSlight decrease at high T Strong low T decrease 200 400 600 800 1000

T [K] Model C+D     

> bNear constant at high T Weak decrease with subsequent increase 200 400 600 800 1000

T [K] Model C+D+Co     

> cDecrease with longterm bounce back Slow high T decrease 200 400 600 800 1000

T [K] 

> 16 18 20 22
> log 10  N [cm  2]

Model C+D+Co+Dr 

> dIncrease from ice Inwards spread Decrease without bounce back

Figure 12. Slab conditions extracted from the chemistry only model (left panels) and model including chemistry and diffusion (second panels), the model without drift (third panels), and the full model (right panels) at 0 .0 Myr (blue), 0 .01 Myr (orange), 0 .1 Myr (green), and 1 .0 Myr (purple). Every marker represents a single column of the 2D density structure turned into input for a slab model (column density above 𝜏 IR = 1 and mass average temperature in that visible column). The marker size is proportional to the logarithm of the slab’s emitting area. The grey dots in panel b-d are model C at 1 Myr. 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55                                                

> [m]
> 0100 200 300
> F [mJy] Model C
> scaled CI Tau
> 1a 6051 K 3645 K 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55
> [m]
> Model C+D
> scaled GQ Lup
> 1b 6051 K 3645 K 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55
> [m]
> Model C+D+Co
> scaled GQ Lup
> 1c 6051 K 3645 K 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55
> [m]
> 0100 200 300
> F [mJy] Model C+D+Co+Dr
> scaled GQ Lup
> 1d 6051 K 3645 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95
> [m]
> 0200 400 600
> F [mJy]
> 0.01 Myr 0.1 Myr 1.0 Myr
> scaled CI Tau
> 2a 1447 K 1615 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95
> [m]
> scaled GQ Lup
> 2b 1447 K 1615 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95
> [m]
> scaled GQ Lup
> 2c 1447 K 1615 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95
> [m]
> 0200 400 600
> F [mJy]
> scaled GQ Lup
> 2d 1447 K 1615 K

Figure 13. Spectral zoom-ins for the chemistry only model (left panels) and model including chemistry and diffusion (second panels), the model without drift (third panels), and the full model (right panels) at 0 .01 Myr (orange), 0 .1 Myr (green), and 1 .0 Myr (purple). Overplotted are the JWST/MIRI spectra of CI Tau (panel 1a and 2a) and GQ Lup (all other panels) scaled to the peak flux of the 𝐸 U = 3645 K water line of the 1 Myr model for comparison (details in Sect. 5.1). The zoom-in from 17 .29 𝜇 m to 17 .6 𝜇 m (top row) contains lines that are used to analyse hot water ( ∼ 17 .32 𝜇 m) and warm water ( ∼ 17 .5 𝜇 m) marked with their upper level energy. The zoom-in from 23 .71 𝜇 m to 24 𝜇 m (bottom row) contains two marked cold water lines. 

model C+D+Co with model C+D in Fig. 14. The warm (panel a) and cold water lines (panel b) evolve similarly with the lines of model C+D+Co ∼ 15 % and ∼ 25 % weaker, respectively. This indi-cates how part of the water reservoir above snow region is captured due to the vertical cold finger effect. The hot water line (panel a) shows a similar strength for model C+D+Co and model C+D up to 0 .01 Myr, with the hot water line of model C+D+Co decreasing afterwards due to stronger radial diffusion replenishing the depleted outer reservoir. Even though, the cold water lines in model C+D+Co are weaker than in model C+D, they still account for a significant increase compared to model C. 

4.4 Effect of pebble drift on mid-IR spectra (model C+D+Co+Dr) 

Lastly, we examine the effect of pebble drift on observables (model C+D+Co+Dr). As seen in panel d of Fig. 12, the sublimation of icy pebbles inside the water snowline leads to an increase in observ-able column density to up to 10 19 .0 cm −2 around 𝑇 = 350 − 500 K at 0.01 Myr. This temperature range corresponds to temperature above the 𝜏 IR = 1 line vertically above the sublimation region of pebbles inside the midplane. This increase in column density coincides with the already discussed decrease at lower temperature ( 𝑇 < 400 K). The observable column density shifts inwards to higher tempera-tures over time with the peak of 10 19 .5 cm −2 at a temperature of 460 K after 1 Myr. At 0 .01 Myr the column density at temperature higher than 530 K drop below their initial value due to an increase in IR opacity resulting from the increase in dust concentration (e.g. panel 3b of Fig. 10). However, at 0 .1 Myr the column densities of all grid points with temperatures above 400 K increases past their initial value (panel d of Fig. 12). We note that the column densities in model C+D+Co+Dr are slightly higher than typically retrieved values from JWST/MIRI observations of ∼ 10 18 − 10 19 cm −2 (e.g. Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Temmink et al. 2024) even though some extreme objects show higher column densities (e.g. HD 35929; Kaeufer et al. 2026). While at these high column densities opacity effects become important, we show that the general conclusions are consistent with higher and lower pebble fluxes with the latter resulting in column densities closer to observed values (Fig. B3). Alternatively, changes in the photodissociation rate or UV and IR opacity of the dust could explain mismatches between our models and observations. To fully explore their impact, evolving temperature structures and radiative transfer simulations of the interstellar and stellar UV are needed which is beyond the scope of this work. Interestingly, the column density at 𝑇 < 350 K decreases com-pared to their initial values as already discussed in the context of 

MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 19 1.0 1.5 2.0       

> F(t)/ F0
> Drift on hot water Drift on warm water 6051K line 3645K line 1615K line 1447K line Model C Model C+D Model C+D+Co Model C+D+Co+Dr a10 310 210 110 0

t [Myr]  

> 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> F(t)/ F0
> Photodis. Drift on cold water b
> Figure 14. Evolution of the water emission line strength (compared to the initial value) of the diagnostic hot, warm (both in panel a), and cold water lines (panel b) for model C (dotted; showing clear signs of photodissociation in the cold water line strengths of 40 % of their initial value), model C+D (dashed dotted), model C+D+Co (dashed), and full model C+D+Co+Dr (solid lines; indicating the effects of drift on all water line strengths).

model C+D+Co but in contrast to this model does not bounce back to higher values. This means that the column densities at these tem-peratures are below values of model C+D but still significantly higher than those of model C. The evolution of the emitting conditions re-sults in changes of the observed spectrum (panel 1d and 2d of Fig. 13). Panel a of Fig. 14 shows that the hot and warm water line increase by more than a factor of 2 and 20 % in strength, respectively. The cold water lines (panel b of Fig. 14 show the same initial drop in flux as model C+D+Co, but recover to about 70 % of their initial flux at 0.1 Myr with drop by a few percent later on. To summarise, (1) chemical processing through photodissociation weakens the cold water lines most significantly, (2) adding diffusion minimises this effect, with the cold water line fluxes increasing on a 

∼ 1 Myr timescale via radial diffusion for the assumed photodissocia-tion rate, (3) non-drifting pebbles capture part of the observable cold water reducing primarily the cold water line fluxes, and (4) pebble drift enhances the hot and warm water reservoir most significantly compared to an equivalent model that only differs in its exclusion of drift (model C+D+Co). 

5 DISCUSSION 5.1 Contributing to the diversity in water spectra 

We compare the simulated spectra of all models to JWST/MIRI ob-servations using the spectra themselves but also the aforementioned line diagnostics introduced by Banzatti et al. (2025). The modelled spectra are overplotted with scaled spectra of CI Tau (Banzatti et al. 2023b) and GQ Lup (Romero-Mirza et al. 2024) to show similarities between simulated and real observations (Fig. 13). Examples of hot-water dominated and cold-water-enriched spectra that have been discussed in detail in literature (e.g. Banzatti et al. 2023b; Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Banzatti et al. 2025; Temmink et al. 2025). We scale their spectra by arbitrary factors to match the peak flux of the 𝐸 U = 3645 K water line and focus on the relative strengths of their lines. None of our models attempts to fit any of the observations. Model C shows a good match with the JWST/MIRI spectrum of CI Tau. This object was in fact previously reported and used as a template of is an example of a water spectrum dominated by hot water (Banzatti et al. 2023b, 2025). The similarity could be inter-preted as a lack of relevance of the other processes in this particular object. This could be achieved by low turbulence (minimising the impact of dynamical processes, see Sect. 3.2). Alternatively, higher and/or strongly radially varying photodissociation rates for this ob-ject could be balanced by dynamical processes leading to similar spectral features. However, a full exploration of different models to fit observations is beyond the scope of this work. All other models share some spectral features with GQ Lup, previously proposed to be a disc dominated by colder water temperatures (Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Banzatti et al. 2025). Especially, the strength of the two cold water lines compared to their neighbouring lines is com-parable between GQ Lup and model C+D, model C+D+Co, and model C+D+Co+Dr. The closest match in the diagnostic water lines to GQ Lup can be seen for model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4 (panels a in Fig. B4). However, the increased strength of the hot water lines in model C+D+Co+Dr is not seen in the observation. The mismatch is larger for the high drift model (model C+D+Co+Dr with 2 ×𝑣 frag ) and less for model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag /2 and model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag = 2.5 − 5 m /s (Fig. B4). Interestingly, model C+D+Dr which shows a higher water concentration in the region above the ice reservoir has weaker cold water lines than GQ Lup when normalised to the warm water line. The lack of fragmentation in this model stops the typically seen (e.g. model C+D+Co+Dr) increase in dust opacity in the inner region. Therefore, even though the cold water lines are strongest compared to all other drift models (Fig. B4) the higher temperature water lines are increased even more. We compare the models to a larger sample of observations using the line diagnostics (Fig. 15). The diagnostics use different ratios between the water lines highlighted in Fig. 13 using their integrated flux (as seen in Fig. 14). We show three different diagnostic diagrams. The x-axis of the first two (panel a and b of Fig. 15) uses the ratio between the warm and hot water line. The line ratio on the vertical axis of the panel a uses two water lines with similar upper level energies but different Einstein A coefficients. This ratio is commonly interpreted as a column density tracer of warm ( 𝑇 ≈ 400 K) water, with lower ratios corresponding to higher column densities (Banzatti et al. 2025). Panel b indicates on the vertical axis the ratio between the sum of both cold water lines to the warm water line. This means that the upper half in panel b is interpreted as a cold water excess. The last diagnostic diagram (panel c of Fig. 15) shows the cold/hot ratio on the horizontal and the ratio between the two cold water lines on the vertical axis. Higher ratios between the two cold water lines are interpreted as an excess in the coldest observable water ( < 200 K). The first conclusion from the model comparison to observed line diagnostics is that the evolutionary tracks strongly overlap with the observations increasing our confidence on the realism of our simula-tions. Additionally, it becomes clear that the evolutionary processes can lead to drastic changes in the line ratios highlighting the need to account for the interplay of all of them when analysing observations. However, some observed ratios are not reproduced by any model track. None of our models significantly increases the coldest water ratio (y-axis of panel c of Fig. 15). This is not further surprising since all models use the same stellar and structural parameters. Similarly, all models (except for model C) show cold/warm water ratios that are typically associated with an cold water excess. This can be a  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 20 T. Kaeufer et al. 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5                

> H2O 3600/6000 K
> 10 0
> H2O 3340 K b/a
> Observations Start Model C Model C+D Model C+D+Co Model C+D+Co+Dr CI Tau GQ Lup aaa2 × vDrift
> vDrift /2 = 10 4
> 2 × vDrift
> vDrift /2 = 10 4
> C+D+Dr
> vfrag = 2.5 5m/s
> 2 × vDrift
> vDrift /2 = 10 4
> C+D+Dr
> vfrag = 2.5 5m/s
> a
> 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5
> H2O 3600/6000 K
> 10 0
> 10 1
> H2O 1500/3600 K
> bbbb
> 10 010 1
> H2O 1500/6000 K
> 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4
> H2O 1447/1615 K
> cccc-3.0 -2.4 -1.8 -1.2 -0.6 0.0
> log 10 (t/Myr)

Figure 15. Water line diagnostic diagram for the evolution of the model C (blue), model C+D (orange), model C+D+Co (green), and model C+D+Co+Dr (purple). CI Tau (pink) and GQ Lup (olive) are highlighted in all panels. The starting position, with constant water concentrations (for a short discussion on that, see Sect. 4.2) is marked by a black cross. The two black triangles and the black star show the end position for the supporting models with half/double the fiducial drift velocity, and model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4 (see Table 3). The evolutionary tracks of model C+D+Dr (dashed) and model C+D+Co+Dr with 

𝑣 frag = 2.5 − 5 m /s (dotted) are shown in grey. The temperatures indicate the upper level energies (Banzatti et al. 2025). The x-axis of panel a and b shows the ratio of water lines tracing warm water emission ( > 400 K) compared to hot water ( ∼ 850 K) as shown in the upper panels of Fig. 13. The x-axis of panel c indicates the cold/hot ratio. The y-axis of the panel a shows the ratio of two lines with different Einstein-A coefficients but similar upper level energies, which are therefore tracing the column densities of ∼ 400 K water. The vertical axis of panel b shows the ratio between water lines tracing cold emission ( ∼ 200 K) and warm emission. Panel c shows the ratio between the two cold water lines on its vertical axis, with the cold/hot ratio shown on the horizontal axis. The grey dots are JWST/MIRI observations (Banzatti et al. 2025; Temmink et al. 2025). 

consequence of the disc setup (e.g. the initialisation with constant water concentrations and the assumed photodissociation rate). The impact of different disc setups (including the effect of different dust opacities and dust-to-gas ratios) will be tested in future work. 

5.1.1 Impact of chemical processing on line diagnostics 

Next, we focus on the individual tracks of all models. For model C, both the cold/warm and warm/hot lines (blue marker in panel b of Fig. 15) decrease strongly over time (from 6 .2 and 3 .0 to 2 .0 and 2.5, respectively). Interestingly, the reduction in column density at 

𝑇 < 400 K for model C does not lead to an increase in the col-umn density tracer (y-axis of panel a) but to a small decrease (from 

∼ 2.7 to ∼ 2.3). This is due to an optical depth effect: emission at higher temperatures is optically thicker given the same column density. If the contribution from low temperatures to these lines is strongly reduced during the model’s evolution, a larger fraction of the emission becomes optically thick, which results in an increase in the column density tracer ratio. This example illustrates how column density reductions can change this tracer in a way that is typically associated with column density increases. Panel c of Fig. 15 shows the ratio of the two cold water lines compared to the cold/hot radio. The cold/hot ratio decreases for model C (from ∼ 19 to ∼ 5), with the ratio of the two cold lines decreasing slightly as well (from ∼ 1.05 to about 1 .0). Model C occupies a similar diagnostic region as CI Tau in all cold water tracers, but CI Tau’s column density tracer indicated higher column densities and an even stronger trend towards higher temperatures in all temperature tracers. 

5.1.2 Impact of diffusion and advection on line diagnostics 

The water line diagnostics for model C+D show a fast drop com-pared to the initial conditions by 0 .6 and 0 .1 in the cold/warm and warm/hot tracer, respectively. This is followed by a long term in-crease of 0 .6 and 0 .2, respectively. Therefore, model C+D moves slightly to the top right in panel b of Fig. 15, which is typically asso-ciated with a cold water excess due to pebble drift. This shows that water diffusion into the cold water reservoir above the snow region can lead to a similar effect as often associated with pebble drift. We note that the diagnostic region occupied by model C+D at 1 Myr corresponds to a stronger enhancement of colder temperature water lines than seen in most observation (even observations with a cold water excess) potentially due to the assumed photodissociation rate. As shown in Sect. 3.2, the strength of this replenishment also de-pends on the disc turbulence. Therefore, we predict in this scenario an observable relation between mass accretion rate as a proxy for disc turbulence and the cold water line flux. It can for example be seen that model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4 occupies a position between model C+D and model C just as expected. The column density tracer (panel a) rises by about 0 .3 due to the dominance of optically thinner colder emission. Lastly, the coldest water line ratio does not change significantly over time (within 0 .02) but is significnalty higher than the final ratio of model C. All temperature tracers show strong over-lap between model C+D and GQ Lup with the column density in GQ Lup being slightly lower than values extracted from our models. 

5.1.3 Impact of non-drifting pebbles on line diagnostics 

Model C+D+Co behaves similarly to model C+D in the line diag-nostic space with, for example, no strong change in its coldest water ratio over time, which corresponds to a higher ratio than model C at 1 Myr. The column density tracer decreases first to 2 .4 due to same effect as discussed for model C, with a subsequent increase to 3 .6 due to the redistribution of water to lower temperatures (see Section 3.3). The warm/hot ratio decreases to 2 .5 before rising again to its initial value. Similarly, the cold/warm ratio decreases to 4 .6 before reaching 5.8 at 1 Myr. This means that the cold water enhancement seen in panel b is slightly less extreme than the one seen in model C+D, but still comparable to the strongest cold water excess observations. 

5.1.4 Impact of pebble drift on line diagnostics 

The line diagnostic ratios of model C+D+Co+Dr, the model includ-ing pebble drift, evolve over time towards higher temperatures. The 

MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 21 

track leads to lower values of cold/warm (3 .6) and warm/hot (1 .7) line ratios at 1 Myr compared to the initial conditions, model C+D, and model C+D+Co. This is surprising since typically observations with a high cold/warm and warm/hot ratio are associated with peb-ble drift dominated discs (e.g. Banzatti et al. 2023b; Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Banzatti et al. 2025). However, as discussed in Sect. 5.1.2 the cold/warm water ratio seen in model C+D is high compared to cold water excess observations (potentially due to the assumed pho-todissociation rate). Therefore, even the reduction in this ratio by model C+D+Co+Dr leaves the model comparable with observations associated with domination of colder water temperatures. This means that cold water excess observations are compatible with models in-cluding pebble drifts even though the effect of drift compared to iden-tical models without drift acts by reducing the cold/warm water ratio. The coldest water tracer (panel c) only increase by a small fraction. From the small grid of models, we cannot conclude if different model setups including drift could lead to a more significant change. Gener-ally, the coldest and cold/warm diagnostics of model C+D+Co+Dr are similar to GQ Lup. However, all ratios involving the hot water line are significantly shifted to higher temperatures in the model. Therefore, these tracers are more similar to CI Tau. The column density diag-nostic (panel a of Fig. 15) shows a strong decrease (to 1 .0) typically associated with higher column densities. This is in line with the strong increase of column density at 𝑇 > 400 K. Additionally, we note that the models with higher and lower drift velocity (see Table 3) follow very similar evolutionary diagnostic tracks. The model with dou-bled the drift velocity continues the path set by model C+D+Co+Dr but continues e.g. to cold/warm and warm/hot ratios of 3 .36 and 1.56, respectively. The model with half the drift velocity on the other hands reaches values (4 .04 and 1 .94) that are already surpassed ear-lier by model C+D+Co+Dr. Similarly, increasing pebble fluxes lead to lower cold/hot water ratios contrary other predictions (e.g. Eq. 3 and Eq. 4 in Krijt et al. 2025). The fundamental difference arises from the previously made assumption that pebble drift affects the ob-servable cold water mass while higher temperatures are unaffected (e.g. Eq. 11 in Romero-Mirza et al. 2024). However, comparing the observable water mass for three models including pebble drift at 1 Myr, we find that the cold water mass, which we define as all emis-sion at 𝑇 < 400 K, varies only by ∼ 10 % with model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 Drift /2 actually having the highest observable cold water mass (∼ 5.77 × 10 −6 M⊕ ) and model C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × 𝑣 Drift having the lowest ( ∼ 5.22 × 10 −6 M⊕ ). This difference is negligible when considering the observable water mass at 𝑇 > 400 K increasing from ∼ 3.35 × 10 −6 M⊕ (for model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 Drift /2) to 

∼ 14 .4 × 10 −6 M⊕ (for model C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × 𝑣 Drift ). Model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag = 2.5 − 5 m /s roughly follows the diagnostic traces of model C+D+Co+Dr. This shows that a fragmen-tation velocity change within a factor of 2 does not have significant impact of the observable diagnostics even though the underlying wa-ter and dust density structure differs. Panel d of Fig. B3 shows the emitting conditions of this model, which are notably different from model C+D+Co+Dr. The observed column density peaks sharply at about 400 − 500 K with column densities at higher temperatures being lower than in model C+D+Co+Dr. The temperature-confined increase comes from the fact that the change in fragmentation velocity leads to a change in pebble size and therefore drift speed. This means that pebbles sublimate their ices in a traffic jam at the transition be-tween both regimes. Since the column density peaks moves to higher temperatures over time, the diagnostics move to higher temperature regions. Additionally, the 𝜏 IR = 1 line increases inside the water snowline hiding more water vapour as already discussed by Houge et al. (2025). Model C+D+Dr which has as the only models shown efficient outwards water vapour diffusion into the region above the ice reservoir shows lower cold/warm ratio than model C+D+Co+Dr (3 .0 instead of 3 .6). This is due to the strong increase in the warm (and hot) water line due to the lack of increasing dust opacity in the inner disc (as discussed in Sect. 5.1). This highlights the role of dust opacity when interpreting mid-IR water spectra. The dif-fusion of water from the vertically mixed plume occurs outwards leading to an decrease in the coldest water line ratio (1 .03) compared to model C+D+Co+Dr (1 .05). Therefore, an increase in the coldest water line ratio requires additional effects than sublimating ice in the midplane that diffuses into the coldest observable regions. We discuss these aspects in Sect. 5.3. 

5.2 Emission regions of diagnostic water lines 

In this section, we link the emission of the diagnostic water lines to their emitting regions. We calculate the radial ranges from which 15 % to 85 % of the radially cumulative flux originates for the hot, warm, and cold water lines. With additional predictions for three far-IR lines at 40 .69 𝜇 m ( 𝐸 U = 550 K), at 46 .48 𝜇 m ( 𝐸 U = 410 K), and at 61 .81 𝜇 m ( 𝐸 U = 552 K) which will be observed by future far-IR mission like the Planetary Origins and Evolution Multispec-tral Monochromator (POEMM 7) and PRobe far-Infrared Mission for Astrophysics (PRIMA 8; Moullet et al. 2025). These radial ranges are plotted on top of all water concentration panels in Fig. 7 and the comparison panels in Fig. 10. Most of the flux of the JWST/MIRI cold water lines comes from the water reservoir above the ice region. This has been shown using full thermochemical models by Vlasblom et al. (2025). We can confirm this behaviour even if diffusion (model C+D; panel a of Fig. 7), diffusion with 𝛼 = 10 −4 (panel b of Fig. 7), additional coagulation and fragmentation and pebble drift (model C+D+Co+Dr; panels 4 of Fig. 10) are accounted for. However, both the warm and cold water lines overlap radially with the midplane snowline in all cases (panel a and panel b of Fig. 7 and panels 4 of Fig. 10). The emission regions are shifted to smaller radii and higher temperatures with a stronger radial concentration gradient as seen most prominently in model C+D+Co+Dr (panel 4d of Fig. 10). Therefore, when pebble drift enhances the water concen-tration inside the midplane snowline ( > 400 K in the disc surface), the cold water lines are getting stronger (see e.g. panel 2d of Fig. 13). However, future far-IR observatories like POEMM and PRIMA will probe colder water lines and truly probe the coldest water emission 

< 400 K. 

5.3 Limitations and future work 

This study shows that the link between cold water line excess and pebble drift is not as straight forward as previously thought. However, given the observed tentative correlation between drift dominated discs and cold water excess (e.g. Banzatti et al. 2023b; Romero-Mirza et al. 2024; Krijt et al. 2025) we explore different scenarios that could lead to that correlation, in preparation for a larger parameter study that is planed for future work. As shown in the Sect. 3.4, the cold water emitting region above the snow surface could be enhanced by drift if outwards transport in the disc surface is efficient. We explain the lack of outwards diffusion in model C+D+Co+Dr by a water cycle including vertical diffusion,    

> 7https://poemm.astro.cornell.edu
> 8https://prima.ipac.caltech.edu MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# 22 T. Kaeufer et al. 

freeze out, coagulation and inwards pebble drift. This cycle has been identified as well using 2D multifluid hydrodynamic simulations by Wang et al. (2025) who highlighted the dependence of the cycle on the snowline shape and radial temperature gradient. The efficiency of this cycle depends on all its individual processes. Stronger advection fields (e.g. Ciesla 2009) can under the right conditions increase the cold water reservoir. Similarly, a change of the ratio between radial and vertical 𝛼 -parameter can lead to the same effect. Constant (radial and vertical) disc turbulence is a simplifying assumption that has been challenged by multiple studies (e.g. Turner et al. 2014; Rosotti 2023). Tuning the ratio between the vertical and radial 𝛼 could lead to stronger radial diffusion which could help increasing the cold water reservoir concentration. Alternately, an important factor that determines which water reser-voir is enhanced strongest through drift is the temperature difference between the midplane and disc surface. Our models make some nec-essary simplifying assumption. We assume the same temperature structure for dust and gas, while several studies show that the gas and dust temperature can differ significantly (e.g. Woitke et al. 2009). Ad-ditionally, we ignore temperature evolution, which given the changes in dust densities in model C+D+Co+Dr can be significant. We also omitted accretion heating in the disc midplane, which can lower the midplane surface temperature difference (Calahan et al. 2026), push-ing out the midplane snowline, and therefore lead to a more direct correlation between observable cold water fluxes and pebble drift. Similarly, Wang et al. (2025) show that latent heat exchange dur-ing ice sublimation can flatten the temperature gradient across the snowline. While we assume a constant pebble flux in this study, 1D models predict strong variations in pebble fluxes within 1 Myr (e.g. Birnstiel et al. 2012; Drążkowska et al. 2021). Future works will study the influence of these profiles on JWST/MIRI observables using our 2D modelling approach. Additionally, we simplify the water chemistry compared to full thermo-chemical models (e.g. assuming a constant photodissocia-tion timescale of 40 yr). This enables us to evolve 2D dynamics and chemistry together. Combining thermo-chemical models with abun-dances based on 1D evolutionary codes can provide further insight into the interplay between detailed chemistry (including temperature changes) and dynamics (Vlasblom et al. submitted). A larger parameter study can be beneficial to assess if the observed cold water assess in some discs could be explained by disc conditions independent of pebble flux. Similarly, future modelling efforts should incorporate the most significant phenomena mentioned above. Ad-ditionally, 1D evolution models predict that several molecular ratios strongly evolve with time (e.g. Sellek et al. 2025). This shows the benefit of not just using water, but also other molecules to assess the impact of pebble drift on JWST/MIRI observations. From an observational point of view, far-IR missions like POEMM and PRIMA will provide a unique opportunity to probe water lines emitted at 𝑇 < 400 K, with high spectral resolution that resolves the lines and allows for a determination of their radial emission region. 

6 CONCLUSIONS 

In this study, we introduce the MAGPIE model (Sect. 2) to analyse the effect of dynamical and chemical processes on the 2D water concentration structure (Sect. 3) and the water emission observed with JWST/MIRI (Sect. 4). For a single disc set-up, we ran a small grid of models (Table 3) including different processes to examine the impact of them on the 2D water density structure and simulated JWST/MIRI spectra. The main conclusions are as following: (i) For a single disc set-up, including/excluding transport pro-cesses leads to changes in simulated JWST/MIRI spectra (Fig. 13) and in most diagnostic line rations (Fig. 15) that are comparable to the spread currently seen in the observed population (Sect. 5.1). (ii) Transport, in the form of diffusion, advection, and pebble drift compared to a static chemical model affects all traced concentrations in every modelled grid cell (Sect. 3). Therefore, dynamics cannot be ignored when describing the inner few au of a protoplanetary disc. (iii) Starting from constant abundances, chemistry mainly influ-ences the observable water reservoir by photodissociating the cold water surface layer (Sect. 3.1) consistent with results by Vlasblom et al. (2025). Chemical water formation enhances cold water in the photodissociated region to abundances of ∼ 10 −6 (Sect. 3.1). While our models only account for interstellar UV, photodissociation due to stellar UV can significantly lower this abundance. (iv) Turbulent diffusion reduces concentration gradients in the disc leading to an increase of water vapour in the photodissociation region compared to a model without diffusion (Sect. 3.2). Therefore, diffusion can lead to an (turbulence strength dependent) increase in lower temperature water tracers (Sect. 5.1) which for the assumed photodissociation rate are extreme cold/warm ratios compared to most cold water excess observations. However, these models do not match the observed 1447 K /1615 K line ratio of objects showing a cold water excess which is sensitive to the coldest water reservoir (𝑇 ≲ 200 K). (v) Freeze out onto pebbles at the midplane reduces the observable cold water reservoir via the vertical cold-finger effect (Sect. 3.3). (vi) Drift and sublimation of icy pebbles does not lead to an exclusive enhancement of the observable cold water fluxes compared to an identical model without drifting pebbles. Instead, depending on the vertical temperature profile, sublimating ices can primarily enhance the hot and warm water fluxes, which overshadows the mild increases in the cold water flux (Sect. 4). Therefore, pebble drift can counter the extreme cold temperature enhancement seen in models including chemistry and diffusion (Sect. 5.1). (vii) Radial diffusion is relatively inefficient at distributing the plume of water vapour released by sublimating pebbles to the region responsible for cold water emission above the snow surface. This is due to a conveyor belt effect of freeze out, coagulation, and pebble drift. However, even if this cycle is interrupted (e.g. due to slow coagulation) and outwards diffusion is more efficient, the colder water tracers do not increase compared to our standard drift model due to generally lower dust concentrations which leads to a lower 

𝜏 IR = 1 layer also at small radii. Therefore, larger water reservoirs are observable at higher temperatures (Sect. 3.4). (viii) A decrease in fragmentation velocity between wet and dry pebbles (of a factor of 2) increases the dust opacity inside the mid-plane water snowline. However, in our models even this increase does not lead to diagnostics shifts to lower temperatures (Sect. 5.1). This study shows the impact of the interplay between chemical and dynamical processes on the water distribution in a protoplanetary disc model. While including different processes can explain some observational different between objects, an extensive parameter study is needed to evaluate the impact of disc structures more generally. This includes not just matching observed line ratios that are currently not reproduced by our models (e.g. high ratios between the coldest water lines) but also comparing to typical retrieved column density and temperature ranges.  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)

# Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 23 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

TK was supported by Science and Technology facilities Council (STFC) grant no. ST/Y002415/1. SK was partly supported by Science and Technology facilities Council (STFC) grant no. ST/Y002415/1. JW is funded by the UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC), grant code ST/Y509383/1. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

The data generated during this study will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author. 

REFERENCES 

Anicich V. G., Futrell J. H., Huntress Jr. W. T., Kim J. K., 1975, International Journal of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes, 18, 63 Arabhavi A. M., et al., 2024, Science, 384, 1086 Arrhenius S., 1889, Zeitschrift für Physikalische Chemie, 4U, 96 Banzatti A., et al., 2023a, AJ, 165, 72 Banzatti A., et al., 2023b, ApJ, 957, L22 Banzatti A., et al., 2025, AJ, 169, 165 Bar-Nun A., Herman G., Laufer D., Rappaport M. L., 1985, Icarus, 63, 317 Bergner J. B., et al., 2024, ApJ, 975, 166 Bethell T., Bergin E., 2009, Science, 326, 1675 Birnstiel T., 2024, ARA&A, 62, 157 Birnstiel T., Klahr H., Ercolano B., 2012, A&A, 539, A148 Bitsch B., Raymond S. N., Izidoro A., 2019, A&A, 624, A109 Booth R. A., Clarke C. J., Madhusudhan N., Ilee J. D., 2017, MNRAS, 469, 3994 Bosman A. D., Bergin E. A., Calahan J., Duval S. E., 2022, ApJ, 930, L26 Bosman A. D., Appelgren J., Bergin E. A., Lambrechts M., Johansen A., 2023, ApJ, 944, L53 Calahan J. K., et al., 2026, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2605.22926 Carr J. S., Najita J. R., 2008, Science, 319, 1504 Carr J. S., Najita J. R., 2011, ApJ, 733, 102 Chiang E. I., Goldreich P., 1997, ApJ, 490, 368 Ciesla F. J., 2009, Icarus, 200, 655 Ciesla F. J., Cuzzi J. N., 2006, Icarus, 181, 178 Cuzzi J. N., Zahnle K. J., 2004, ApJ, 614, 490 Dartois E., Dutrey A., Guilloteau S., 2003, A&A, 399, 773 Dominik C., Dullemond C. P., 2024, A&A, 682, A144 Dominik C., Tielens A. G. G. M., 1997, ApJ, 480, 647 Dominik C., Min M., Tazaki R., 2021, OpTool: Command-line driven tool for creating complex dust opacities, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2104.010 (ascl:2104.010) Drążkowska J., Stammler S. M., Birnstiel T., 2021, A&A, 647, A15 Drążkowska J., et al., 2023, in Inutsuka S., Aikawa Y., Muto T., Tomida K., Tamura M., eds, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII. p. 717 ( arXiv:2203.09759 ), doi:10.48550/arXiv.2203.09759 Du F., et al., 2017, ApJ, 842, 98 Dutrey A., et al., 2017, A&A, 607, A130 Furuya K., Aikawa Y., Nomura H., Hersant F., Wakelam V., 2013, ApJ, 779, 11 Galloway-Sprietsma M., et al., 2025, ApJ, 984, L10 Gordon I. E., et al., 2022, J. Quant. Spectrosc. Radiative Transfer, 277, 107949 Gundlach B., Blum J., 2015, ApJ, 798, 34 Habing H. J., 1968, Bull. Astron. Inst. Netherlands, 19, 421 Houge A., et al., 2025, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 537, 691 Kaeufer T., Min M., Woitke P., Kamp I., Arabhavi A. M., 2024, A&A, 687, A209 Kaeufer T., et al., 2026, MNRAS, 545, staf2056 Kalyaan A., Pinilla P., Krijt S., Mulders G. D., Banzatti A., 2021, ApJ, 921, 84 Kalyaan A., et al., 2023, ApJ, 954, 66 Kim J. K., Theard L. P., Huntress Jr. W. T., 1974, International Journal of Mass Spectrometry and Ion Processes, 15, 223 Klippenstein S. J., Georgievskii Y., McCall B. J., 2010, Journal of Physical Chemistry A, 114, 278 Krijt S., Ciesla F. J., 2016, ApJ, 822, 111 Krijt S., Ciesla F. J., Bergin E. A., 2016, ApJ, 833, 285 Krijt S., Schwarz K. R., Bergin E. A., Ciesla F. J., 2018, ApJ, 864, 78 Krijt S., Bosman A. D., Zhang K., Schwarz K. R., Ciesla F. J., Bergin E. A., 2020, ApJ, 899, 134 Krijt S., Kama M., McClure M., Teske J., Bergin E. A., Shorttle O., Walsh K. J., Raymond S. N., 2023, in Inutsuka S., Aikawa Y., Muto T., Tomida K., Tamura M., eds, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Se-ries Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII. p. 1031 ( arXiv:2203.10056 ), doi:10.48550/arXiv.2203.10056 Krijt S., et al., 2025, ApJ, 990, L72 Leemker M., Facchini S., Curone P., Rampinelli L., Benisty M., Garufi A., Humphreys E., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2511.16737 Lepp S., Dalgarno A., Sternberg A., 1987, ApJ, 321, 383 Lodders K., 2003, ApJ, 591, 1220 McElroy D., Walsh C., Markwick A. J., Cordiner M. A., Smith K., Millar T. J., 2013, A&A, 550, A36 Meijerink R., Pontoppidan K. M., Blake G. A., Poelman D. R., Dullemond C. P., 2009, ApJ, 704, 1471 Mollière P., et al., 2022, ApJ, 934, 74 Morbidelli A., Lunine J. I., O’Brien D. P., Raymond S. N., Walsh K. J., 2012, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 40, 251 Moullet A., et al., 2025, PRIMA General Observer Science Book Volume 2 (arXiv:2511.10927 ), https://arxiv.org/abs/2511.10927 

Öberg K. I., Murray-Clay R., Bergin E. A., 2011, ApJ, 743, L16 Oka T., 2013, Chemical Reviews, 113, 8738 Piso A.-M. A., Öberg K. I., Birnstiel T., Murray-Clay R. A., 2015, ApJ, 815, 109 Robinson A., Booth R. A., Owen J. E., 2024, MNRAS, 529, 1524 Romero-Mirza C. E., et al., 2024, ApJ, 975, 78 Ros K., Johansen A., 2013, A&A, 552, A137 Rosenfeld K. A., Andrews S. M., Hughes A. M., Wilner D. J., Qi C., 2013, ApJ, 774, 16 Rosotti G. P., 2023, New Astron. Rev., 96, 101674 Salyk C., Pontoppidan K. M., Blake G. A., Lahuis F., van Dishoeck E. F., Evans II N. J., 2008, ApJ, 676, L49 Salyk C., Pontoppidan K. M., Blake G. A., Najita J. R., Carr J. S., 2011, ApJ, 731, 130 Sato T., Okuzumi S., Ida S., 2016, A&A, 589, A15 Schneider A. D., Bitsch B., 2021, A&A, 654, A71 Schoonenberg D., Ormel C. W., 2017, A&A, 602, A21 Sellek A. D., van Dishoeck E. F., 2025, A&A, 701, A239 Sellek A. D., Vlasblom M., van Dishoeck E. F., 2025, A&A, 694, A79 Semenov D., Wiebe D., 2011, ApJS, 196, 25 Shakura N. I., Sunyaev R. A., 1973, A&A, 24, 337 Stammler S. M., Birnstiel T., 2022, ApJ, 935, 35 Temmink M., et al., 2024, A&A, 689, A330 Temmink M., et al., 2025, A&A, 699, A134 Tielens A. G. G. M., 2021, Molecular Astrophysics. Cambridge University Press Turner N. J., Fromang S., Gammie C., Klahr H., Lesur G., Wardle M., Bai X.-N., 2014, in Beuther H., Klessen R. S., Dullemond C. P., Henning T., eds, Protostars and Planets VI. pp 411–432 ( arXiv:1401.7306 ), doi:10.2458/azu_uapress_9780816531240-ch018 Vlasblom M., Temmink M., Sellek A. D., van Dishoeck E. F., 2025, A&A, 703, A52 Wagner A. F., Graff M. M., 1987, ApJ, 317, 423 Wang Y., Ormel C. W., Mori S., Bai X.-N., 2025, A&A, 696, A38 Westley M. S., Baragiola R. A., Johnson R. E., Baratta G. A., 1995, Nature, 373, 405 MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) 24 T. Kaeufer et al. 

Williams J., Krijt S., Bitsch B., Houge A., Bergner J., 2025, MNRAS, 544, 3562 Woitke P., Kamp I., Thi W.-F., 2009, A&A, 501, 383 Woitke P., et al., 2016, A&A, 586, A103 Woitke P., Arabhavi A. M., Kamp I., Thi W.-F., 2022, A&A, 668, A164 Woitke P., Thi W.-F., Arabhavi A. M., Kamp I., Kóspál Á., Ábrahám P., 2024, A&A, 683, A219 Yang L., Li Y.-P., Dong R., Doi K., Liu H. B., Huang P., 2025, ApJ, 989, 176 Zsom A., Ormel C. W., Güttler C., Blum J., Dullemond C. P., 2010, A&A, 513, A57 van Dishoeck E. F., Herbst E., Neufeld D. A., 2013, Chemical Reviews, 113, 9043 van Dishoeck E. F., Bergin E. A., Lis D. C., Lunine J. I., 2014, in Beuther H., Klessen R. S., Dullemond C. P., Henning T., eds, Protostars and Planets VI. pp 835–858 (arXiv:1401.8103 ), doi:10.2458/azu_uapress_9780816531240-ch036 van Dishoeck E. F., et al., 2021, A&A, 648, A24 

APPENDIX A: ADDITIONAL CHEMISTRY INFORMATION 

This section contains additional figures explaining the chemical model and a subsection focused on the abundance of H 3+. Fig. A1 and Fig A2 display the number density and abundance of CO and H2, respectively. The reaction rates of reaction 22 (between H 3+ and CO) and reaction 23 (between H 3+ and H 2O) are shown in Fig. A3. The number density of H 3+ is described in reaction 25 (repeated below for clarity) by a simple balance between the formation via H 2

and the destruction by CO and H 2O. In this section, we highlighting a few consequences of this reaction equation. As seen in Fig. A3, the reaction rates for the two destruction reactions vary by no more than an order of magnitude within the model setup. Therefore, the number densities of CO and water which vary by several orders of magnitude will dominate the amount of H 3+ destruction. Below we repeat Eq. 25 for clarity purposes. 

𝑛  H3+  = 𝜁 CR 𝑛 (H2)

𝑛 (CO ) 𝑘 1 + 𝑛 (H2O) 𝑘 2

. (A1) For the toy model in this appendix, we assume 𝑘 1 ≈ 10 −9 cm 3/s, 

𝑘 2 ≈ 10 −8 cm 3/s, and 𝜁 ≈ 10 −17 s−1. The interesting behaviour of H3+ comes when examining the relation between molecular abun-dances and number densities. Assuming a constant abundance of H 2,

Figure A1. Number density of CO. The colors indicate the 2D number densities with the red line denoting the initial water snowline. 

Figure A2. Abundance of H 2. The colors indicate the 2D abundances with the red line denoting the initial water snowline. 

Figure A3. Reaction rates of reaction 22 (top panel; between H 3+ and CO) and reaction 23 (bottom panel; between H 3+ and H 2O). 

H2O, and CO (for this model 0 .5, 10 −4, and 10 −4, respectively) an increase in the gas number density will be reflected by an equivalent increase in all molecular number densities (see Fig. A4). However, due to the nature of Eq. 25 equivalent increases in H 2 will be can-celled out by CO and H 2O leading to a constant number density of H3+ which depends on the assumed molecular abundances, ionization rate, and reaction rate (as already shown by Lepp et al. 1987). There-fore, the H 3+ abundance will increase with decreasing gas number 

MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 25 10 6 10 7 10 8 10 9 10 10 10 11 10 12 10 13 

ngas [cm 3]           

> 10 4
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 5
> 10 8
> 10 11
> n(x)[cm  3]
> H+3
> H2
> H2OCO
> 10 18
> 10 17
> 10 16
> 10 15
> 10 14
> 10 13
> 10 12
> 10 11
> n(H +3 )/ ngas

Figure A4. Toy model number densities of H 3+, H 2, H 2O, and CO as a function of gas density. The H 3+ abundance (purple) is shown on the right axis. 

density, making gas-phase water formation via H 3+ more prevalent in lower mass discs if all other factors are assumed to be constant. 

APPENDIX B: SUPPORT MODEL FIGURES 

In this section, we present additional figures regarding the supporting models. This includes the same 2D abundance figure as shown for model C+D (Fig. 6 ) but for 𝛼 = 10 −4 (Fig. B1), the surface density evolution of all supporting models including drift (Fig. B2), the emitting conditions extracted from all supporting models (Fig. B3) and the resulting spectra (Fig. B4). 

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/L ATEX file prepared by the author. MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) 26 T. Kaeufer et al. 

Figure B1. The chemical and dynamical evolution of water in model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4 (first supporting model in Table 3). Every column depicts a different time during the evolution (initial conditions, 0 .1 Myr, and 1 Myr) of the water abundance (top row), oxygen abundance (second row), and OH abundance (last row). The snowline, temperature contours and opacity lines are shown for reference. 2

> 02
> log 10  ( /gcm  2)

C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × vfrag 

> 1a

C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag /2 

> 1b

C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag = 2.5 5m/s 

> 1c

C+D+Dr             

> Surface density: log 10 (dust )
> log 10 (peb )
> log 10 (ice, peb )
> log 10 (ice, dust )
> log 10 (water )
> Time: 0.0 Myr 0.01 Myr 0.1 Myr 1.0 Myr 1d 0.2 110

r [au]   

> 2
> 02
> log 10  ( /gcm  2) 2a 0.2 110

r [au]   

> 2b 0.2 110

r [au]   

> 2c 0.2 110

r [au] 

> 2d

Figure B2. Evolution of surface densities for model C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × 𝑣 frag (panels a), model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag /2 (panels b), model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag = 2.5 − 5 m /s (panels c), and model C+D+Dr (panels d). The different colours correspond to different surface densities with the dust, pebble, ice on pebbles, ice on dust grains, and water vapour surface density depicted in blue, orange, green, purple, and brown, respectively. The upper panels show all solids while the lower panels depict all water surface densities. The initial conditions (faint lines) are the same for all models. The surface densities at 0 .01 Myr (dotted line), 0 .1 Myr (dashed line) and 1 Myr (solid line) are displayed as well. MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026) Water snowline: I. Effects on mid-IR spectra 27 200 400 600 800 1000 

T [K] 

16 18 20 22 

> log 10  N [cm  2]

C+D with = 10 4

0.0 Myr 0.01 Myr 0.1 Myr 1.0 Myr a200 400 600 800 1000 

T [K] C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × vfrag 

b200 400 600 800 1000 

T [K] C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag /2 

c200 400 600 800 1000 

T [K] C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag = 2.5 5m/s 

d200 400 600 800 1000 

T [K] 

16 18 20 22 

> log 10  N [cm  2]

C+D+Dr 

e

Figure B3. Slab conditions extracted for model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4 (panel a), model C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × 𝑣 frag (panel b), model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag /2(panels c), model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag = 2.5 − 5 m /s (panel d), and model C+D+Dr (panel e) at 0 .0 Myr (blue), 0 .01 Myr (orange), 0 .1 Myr (green), and 1.0 Myr (purple). Every marker represents a single column of the 2D density structure turned into input for a slab model (column density above 𝜏 IR = 1 and mass average temperature in that visible column). The marker size is proportional to the logarithm of the slab’s emitting area. 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55 

[ m] 

> 0100 200 300 400 500
> F [mJy]

C+D with = 10 4      

> scaled GQ Lup
> 1a 6051 K 3645 K 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55

[ m] 

C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × vfrag       

> scaled GQ Lup
> 1b 6051 K 3645 K 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55

[ m] 

C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag /2       

> scaled GQ Lup
> 1c 6051 K 3645 K 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55

[ m] 

C+D+Co+Dr with vfrag = 2.5 5m/s       

> scaled GQ Lup
> 1d 6051 K 3645 K 17.30 17.35 17.40 17.45 17.50 17.55

[ m] 

> 0100 200 300 400 500
> F [mJy]

C+D+Dr      

> scaled GQ Lup
> 1e 6051 K 3645 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95

[ m]      

> 0200 400 600
> F [mJy]
> 0.01 Myr 0.1 Myr 1.0 Myr
> scaled GQ Lup
> 2a 1447 K 1615 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95

[ m]      

> GQ Lup
> 2b 1447 K 1615 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95

[ m]      

> scaled GQ Lup
> 2c 1447 K 1615 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95

[ m]      

> scaled GQ Lup
> 2d 1447 K 1615 K 23.75 23.80 23.85 23.90 23.95

[ m]  

> 0200 400 600
> F [mJy]
> scaled GQ Lup
> 2e 1447 K 1615 K

Figure B4. Spectral zoom-ins for model C+D with 𝛼 = 10 −4 (panels a), model C+D+Co+Dr with 2 × 𝑣 frag (panels b), model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag /2(panels c), model C+D+Co+Dr with 𝑣 frag = 2.5 − 5 m /s (panels d), and model C+D+Dr (panels e) at 0 .01 Myr (orange), 0 .1 Myr (green), and 1 .0 Myr (purple). Overplotted is the JWST/MIRI spectrum of GQ Lup scaled to the peak flux of the 𝐸 U = 3645 K water line of the 1 Myr model for comparison (details in Sect. 5.1). The zoom-in from 17 .29 𝜇 m to 17 .6 𝜇 m (top row) contains lines that are used to analyse hot water ( ∼ 17 .32 𝜇 m) and warm water ( ∼ 17 .5 𝜇 m) marked with their upper level energy. The zoom-in from 23 .71 𝜇 m to 24 𝜇 m (bottom row) contains two marked cold water lines. MNRAS 000 , 1–25 (2026)