Draft version July 24, 2026
Typeset using LATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1
The Effects of Magnetic Accretion on the Spatial Extent of White Dwarf Pollution
Dang Pham
,1, ∗Aster G. Taylor
,2, † and Tim Cunningham
3
1JILA and Dept. of Astrophysical and Planetary Sciences, CU Boulder, Boulder, CO 80309, USA
2Dept. of Astronomy, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA
3Center for Astrophysics — Harvard & Smithsonian, 60 Garden St., Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
ABSTRACT
Many white dwarfs are polluted by metals, which are generally understood to be the accreted rem-
nants of a planetary system. Modeling these systems typically assumes that the metal concentration is
homogeneous throughout the white dwarf’s atmosphere. However, the magnetic fields of a white dwarf
may affect the accretion geometry of the white dwarf via magnetospheric accretion. Convection in the
white dwarf’s photosphere will then transport the metals across the surface, with a structure set by
the relative sinking versus spreading timescales. In this work, we construct models for the accretion
geometry, subsequent spreading, and observed pollution of magnetic white dwarfs. We show that the
magnetic fields will initially concentrate the pollution into a narrow region of the white dwarf’s sur-
face. The relative spreading and sinking timescales determine whether the metals become uniformly
distributed or remain confined to localized patches. If the magnetic field and spin poles are misaligned,
then patchy white dwarfs exhibit periodically variable pollution signatures, which enable constraints
on the patch area. We explore this model as a possible explanation for the recent detection of peri-
odically variable pollution signatures in magnetic white dwarfs. Finally, we also demonstrate that the
concentration of material due to the magnetic field may lead to systematic underestimates of the mass
accretion rate onto these objects.
Keywords: White dwarf stars (1799), Magnetic fields (994), Accretion (14), Stellar atmospheres (1584),
DZ stars (1848)
1. INTRODUCTION
More than 1700 white dwarfs have been observed with
photospheres polluted by metals (e.g., B. Zuckerman
et al. 2003; J. T. Williams et al. 2024), with the con-
sensus that these heavier elements originated from the
surrounding planetary system (e.g., M. Jura 2003; B.
Zuckerman et al. 2010). This phenomenon is believed
to be wide-spread, as up to 50 % of white dwarfs are ex-
pected to be polluted (B. Zuckerman et al. 2003, 2010;
D. Koester et al. 2014; C. J. Manser et al. 2024; L. B.
Ould Rouis et al. 2024). There are many proposed dy-
namical mechanisms to deliver reservoirs of exoplane-
tary bodies to the tidal disruption limit, ranging from
Oort Clouds under the influence of the Galactic tide
to secular chaos in inner planetary systems (e.g., C. Al-
cock et al. 1986; J. H. Debes & S. Sigurdsson 2002; A. J.
Mustill et al. 2014; J. L. Smallwood et al. 2018; I. L. Tri-
erweiler et al. 2022; C. E. O’Connor et al. 2022, 2023; T.
Akiba et al. 2024; D. Pham & H. Rein 2024; D. Veras
Email: dang.pham@colorado.edu, agtaylor@umich.edu
∗AGT and DP contributed equally and are joint first authors.
† Fannie and John Hertz Foundation Fellow
et al. 2024). These pollution reservoirs are typically con-
strained by the composition of metals observed on white
dwarfs, while the dynamical mechanisms must be capa-
ble of producing the inferred accretion rates. Most pol-
luted white dwarf spectra resemble the composition of
rocky solar system bodies while inferred accretion rates
can span many orders of magnitude (E. B. Bauer & L.
Bildsten 2019; K. D. Putirka & S. Xu 2021; S. Xu & A.
Bonsor 2021; S. Blouin & S. Xu 2022).
Simultaneously, some white dwarfs exhibit strong
magnetic fields of unknown origin, with three main can-
didates: fossil fields (C. A. Tout et al. 2004; M. Cantiello
et al. 2016), crystallization (J. Isern et al. 2017; M.
Camisassa et al. 2024; J. R. Fuentes et al. 2024), and
binary interactions (C. A. Tout et al. 2008; G. P. Briggs
et al. 2018; L. Ferrario et al. 2020). In a volume-limited
spectropolarimetric survey, S. Bagnulo & J. D. Land-
street (2021) found that more than 20% of white dwarfs
within 20 pc of the Sun are magnetic, with observed field
strengths of 40 kG - 100 MG. White dwarfs have been
discovered to have field strengths reaching hundreds of
MG with the largest known field reaching B ≃900 MG
(I. Caiazzo et al. 2021). By identifying magnetic white
dwarfs with Zeeman splitting in the SDSS 100 pc sam-
arXiv:2607.20747v1  [astro-ph.SR]  22 Jul 2026


2
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
ples, A. Moss et al. (2025) found two statistically sig-
nificant subpopulations of magnetic white dwarfs:
a
young, high-mass, high-field-strength population and an
old, average-mass, weak-field-strength population. Note
that the samples in A. Moss et al. (2025) are limited to
field strengths between 1–100 MG due to observational
bias.
Since both magnetism and debris disks of tidally dis-
rupted bodies are common around white dwarfs, many
previous studies have investigated the process of mag-
netic accretion onto white dwarfs (e.g., R. R. Rafikov
2011; B. D. Metzger et al. 2012).
Magnetic fields as
weak as 0.1–1 kG may affect the accreted material (B. D.
Metzger et al. 2012) and may shield the debris disk from
highly volatile material (W.-H. Zhou et al. 2024), which
may explain the dearth of observed volatiles in polluted
white dwarfs.
Recent observational evidence has shown metal lines
that vary in equivalent width with magnetic field
strength on the rotational period (S. Bagnulo et al.
2024a). One possible explanation for this is magnetic
accretion on a polluted white dwarf, where metals may
be concentrated towards regions of high magnetic field
strength (S. Bagnulo et al. 2024a,b), although further
work is required to confirm this hypothesis. Nonethe-
less, the impacts of magnetic fields on accretion, surface
spreading, and the corresponding observational signa-
tures remain undetermined. Of particular interest is the
photometric variability and the inferred mass accretion
rate of polluting elements.
This work studies the effects of magnetic fields on
white dwarf accretion and their observational implica-
tions by applying accretion physics of similar systems
along with white dwarf simulation techniques (R. R.
Rafikov 2011; E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten 2019; T. Cun-
ningham et al. 2021). Specifically, we model the impact
of magnetic fields on the accretion of metals, the metal
spreading process in a white dwarf atmosphere, and the
resulting observational signatures.
We show that the magnetic field strength of white
dwarfs will result in significant qualitative differences in
the accretion flow, where the magnetic field will trun-
cate the accretion disk once it becomes gaseous. A sim-
ple qualitative model of the white dwarf accretion disk
is formulated on the basis of this result. The magnetic
fields will also act to concentrate the pollution into a
small region of the white dwarf’s surface. These pol-
luting metals will only punch through a small fraction
of the photosphere before their motion is dominated by
collisions with ions. Once in the photosphere, the exis-
tence of a convection zone and the relative sinking versus
spreading timescales will determine the structure of the
pollution region and the fraction of the white dwarf’s
surface that is polluted. The projection of this pollution
region from a given viewing angle will have significant
impacts on the measured mass accretion rate and the
variability of detected metal pollution.
This paper is structured as follows: Sec. 2 considers
the effects of magnetic fields on the white dwarf’s accre-
tion disk and the resulting model for the disk structure,
while the effects on the area of the accretion beam are
explored in Sec. 3. We then study the vertical sinking
and horizontal diffusion in the magnetic white dwarf’s
atmosphere in Sec. 4 and show that the white dwarf’s
patchiness will remain significant if vertical metal set-
tling is altered or horizontal diffusion is suppressed.
The impact of these results on observed polluted white
dwarfs is calculated in Sec. 5. In Sec. 6, we discuss the
impact of our results on inferred accretion rates and the
caveats of this model, before concluding in Sec. 7.
2. ACCRETION DISK STRUCTURE
The material that is accreted onto a polluted white
dwarf is expected to be the debris from many sources,
ranging from close-in planets to distant exo-Oort Cloud
objects (e.g., C. E. O’Connor et al. 2022, 2023; D. Pham
& H. Rein 2024; T. Akiba et al. 2024; D. Veras et al.
2024).
Once these objects are disturbed onto orbits
with perihelia less than the Roche limit, they will be
destroyed and form an accretion disk (M. Jura 2003).
This disk will most likely be eccentric and inclined rel-
ative to the white dwarf’s spin axis (O. A. Goksu et al.
2024). This section discusses the structure of the accre-
tion disk and the various forces at work.
The structure of the accretion disk can be described
as follows — the Roche radius RR is the outer edge of
the accretion disk, the sublimation radius Rs sets the
boundary between the gas disk and the dust disk, the
gas magnetic accretion radius Rg
B and the dust magnetic
accretion radius Rd
B are where the gas and the dust cou-
ple to the magnetic fields (respectively), and the coro-
tation radius Rc sets the distance at which material is
accreted by magnetic fields, rather than accelerated out
of the system. A diagram of the structure of the white
dwarf and accretion disk system is shown in Fig. 1.
The polluting debris disk will be modeled as having
two components — an interior gas disk and an exterior
dust disk (see, e.g., R. R. Rafikov 2011; L. K. Rogers
et al. 2025). Tidally disrupted bodies will feed the dust
disk at its exterior edge, which is approximately the
Roche radius. This radius is given by (see F. H. Shu
1982)
RR = R⋆

2ρ⋆
ρb
1/3
,
(1)
where ρ⋆is the density of the white dwarf, ρb is the
density of the disrupted body, and R⋆is the radius of
the star. At this point, the debris will consist mostly
of solid dust particles, with little gas content. Highly
volatile gasses will have been removed from the body
during its inward trajectory and cleared by magnetic
fields (W.-H. Zhou et al. 2024).
Although the dusty
material can be approximated as a Shakura-Sunyaev α-
disk (N. I. Shakura & R. A. Sunyaev 1973), the disk


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
3
Dust disk
RR
Rs
R٭
PR Effect
Rc
RB
Magnetic
accretion
Pollution 
region
White
dwarf
Spin 
axis
Spin 
axis
Disk
plane
Inclination
Rg
Figure 1. The structure of the white dwarf accretion disk. The magnetic truncation radius Rg
B and the corotation radius Rc
are to the right. The disk is not shown to scale. The disk is processed by the Poynting-Robertson (PR) effect from the Roche
limit RR. Once the dust reaches the sublimation temperature, at the location Rs, it is coupled to the magnetic field lines and
begins to accrete onto a white dwarf with radius R⋆. The pollution regions will be two symmetric thin bands on the surface of
the white dwarf.
will not be heavily ionized and the dust grains will be
relatively large. As a result, the turbulent α viscosity
will not be large enough to accrete debris at the rates
necessary for observed pollution. Instead, the Poynting-
Robertson effect will migrate material inward from the
outer (Roche) radius (R. R. Rafikov 2011; B. D. Metzger
et al. 2012). In addition, A. Okuya et al. (2023) showed
that the presence of volatiles may enhance the material
delivery rate by orders of magnitude above the Poynting-
Robertson drag rate.
The boundary between the gas and the dust disk is
the dust sublimation radius Rs, where the dust is subli-
mated by the white dwarf’s radiation. Following previ-
ous work, the dust sublimation radius is (M. Jura 2003,
2008; S. Xu & M. Jura 2012)
Rs = R⋆
 2
3π
1/3 T⋆
Ts
4/3
,
(2)
where T⋆is the temperature of the white dwarf, Ts ≃
1500 K is the dust sublimation temperature, and R⋆is
the stellar radius. This equation takes the scaled form
Rs
R⊙
≃7.5 × 10−2

R⋆
0.01 R⊙
  T⋆
104 K
4/3
.
(3)
Interior to this point, the disk is almost entirely gas,
which is at least partially ionized by both thermal pro-
cesses and ionizing radiation from the white dwarf. Ex-
terior to this point, the disk consists of relatively-large
dust particles.
These dust particles will be slightly
charged due to collisions, but only up to a few electron
charges. These properties have important consequences
for the effects of magnetic fields on the pollution disk.
There are two distinct magnetic truncation radii, at
which the accreting material is bound to the magnetic
field lines — one for the gas and one for the dust. The
gas magnetic truncation radius, Rg
B, takes the form (P.
Ghosh & F. K. Lamb 1978; R. D. Blandford & D. G.
Payne 1982)
Rg
B = ω
 B4
⋆R12
⋆
GM⋆˙M 2
1/7
.
(4)
In this equation, B⋆is the stellar magnetic field strength,
M⋆is the stellar mass, ˙M is the mass accretion rate onto
the white dwarf, and ω ∼1 is a scaling factor of order
unity. This is the radius at which the pressure due to
the magnetic field is balanced by the ram pressure of the
accreting flow. Scaled to typical values, this equation
becomes
Rg
B
R⊙
≃3.84

B⋆
102 kG
4/7 
R⋆
0.01 R⊙
5/7
×
 M⋆
M⊙
−1/7 
˙M
1010 g/s
!−2/7
.
(5)
However, this truncation radius only accounts for the
strength of the magnetic field and does not address the
issue of ionization, since neutral material will entirely
ignore the magnetic fields. In contrast to the star for-
mation problem, white dwarfs are small and dim enough
that their magnetic fields can become significant exterior
to where ionization occurs. There are two components
of the disk, the dust and the gas, both of which may be
ionized at different radii.
We first compute a magnetic truncation radius for the
slightly-charged dust disk Rd
B. This truncation radius is
defined to be the point where the force on a dust particle
due to the magnetic field is comparable to the force on
the particle due to gravity. For a dust particle of mass
md at a distance r, the magnitude of the gravitational
force is
|F G| = GM⋆md
r2
.
(6)


4
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
If the dust particle carries a charge q, then the Lorentz
force has a magnitude of
|F B| = qB v
c ,
(7)
where v is the velocity of the dust particle with respect
to the magnetic field. If the magnetic field is corotating
with the white dwarf and the dust particle is in Ke-
plerian motion, then v = r(Ω⋆−Ω), where Ω⋆is the
white dwarf rotation rate and Ωis the Keplerian rotation
rate. Since B(r) ≃B⋆(r/R⋆)−3 and Ω= (GM⋆/r3)1/2,
equating |F G| = |F B| means that the magnetic trunca-
tion radius of the dust disk is
Rd
B =

Ω⋆
√GM⋆
+
√GM⋆mdc
qB⋆R3⋆
−2/3
.
(8)
The dust particles typically carry a few electron charges
(e.g., A. V. Ivlev et al. 2016; T. Balduin et al. 2023).
Even for dust masses as low as m = 10−9 g and mag-
netic field strengths of B = 107 G, the dust magnetic
truncation radius Rd
B < R⋆, implying that the dust will
never be coupled to the magnetic field lines.
Therefore, the more critical point is where the gaseous
disk is ionized. This depends heavily on the composi-
tion of the gas disk and the first ionization energy of its
constituent elements. Alkali metals such as sodium and
potassium will easily thermally ionize at the 1500 K sub-
limation temperature and are dominant ion sources at
this temperature (see, e.g., T. Umebayashi & T. Nakano
1988; S. A. Balbus & J. F. Hawley 2000; S. Fromang
et al. 2002). Similar to the inner regions of protoplane-
tary disks, if these elements are present in any signif-
icant degree, then the resulting ionization fraction is
xe ≳10−12(nn/1015 cm−3)−1/2, where nn is the neu-
tral number density and nn ∼1015 cm−3 is typical for
protoplanetary disks and for this circumstance (if the
viscosity parameter α ≃10−4). At this ionization level
and density, collisions between the ions and the neutrals
will cause the gas to couple to the field. The ultraviolet
and X-ray luminosity of the white dwarf will serve to
further ionize this gas, supporting the coupling between
the magnetic field lines and the disk.
In addition, even if sodium and potassium are not
present in meaningful abundances, cosmic rays will ion-
ize the tenuous surface of the disk.
The total disk
surface density is approximately 0.1 g/cm2, significantly
less than the ∼100 g/cm2 attenuation length of the cos-
mic ray ionization rate (T. Umebayashi & T. Nakano
1988), so the ionization rate due to cosmic rays will be
ζ ∼10−17 s−1 throughout the disk (L. Spitzer & M. G.
Tomasko 1968). At a temperature of T = 1500 K and
nn ∼1015 cm−3, the corresponding steady-state ioniza-
tion fraction is ∼4 × 10−13, which is sufficient to cou-
ple the ions and neutrals (P. J. Armitage 2020). While
chemical network models are required to calculate the
ionization fraction in detail, this toy model indicates
that the cosmic rays are likely sufficient to quickly cou-
ple the gas to the magnetic field of the white dwarf. The
ionized (and magnetized) gas particles will then experi-
ence a negative torque from the white dwarf’s magnetic
field, since dust sublimation occurs inside the corotation
radius (see Fig. 2).
2.1. Ordering of Radii
The structure of the accretion disk is determined by
the Roche radius RR, the sublimation radius Rs, the
gas magnetic accretion radius Rg
B, the dust magnetic
accretion radius Rd
B, and the corotation radius Rc. The
ordering of these radii determines the structure of the
pollution disk and the pattern of pollution on the surface
of the white dwarf. The dominant factor is where the
infalling material is coupled to the magnetic fields, at
which point it will be accreted onto the surface of the
white dwarf in a constricted region. In order for material
to be coupled to the magnetic field, it must be within
its corresponding magnetic accretion radius.
Fig.
2 explores the structure of the pollution disk
for a 0.6 M⊙white dwarf across a range of parameters,
including magnetic field strength, rotation rate, mass
accretion rate, and white dwarf temperature. We con-
sider magnetic fields B = 103–107 G, rotation rates Ω⋆=
10−6–10−4 s−1, mass accretion rates
˙M = 106–1010 g/s,
and temperatures T⋆= 3000–105 K.
If the dust accretion radius Rd
B is greater than the
sublimation radius Rs, then the disk truncation radius
RX = Rd
B. Here, RX always represents the radius of
the inner edge of the disk. If Rd
B < Rs, then the dust
will not be coupled to the field at any point. In this
case, the truncation radius RX is the minimum of the
gas accretion radius and the sublimation radius. Over
this parameter space, the gas accretion radius Rg
B > Rs.
Since the dust magnetic accretion radius Rd
B is always
less than R⋆, the dust disk is never coupled to the mag-
netic field. Therefore, even for white dwarfs with some-
what weak magnetic fields, the accreting material will
become truncated by the field approximately where the
gas sublimates, since it will almost immediately become
ionized.
Note that if the corotation radius Rc < RX, then the
magnetic fields will act to accelerate the material and
prevent pollution, rather than concentrating it onto the
surface.
In addition, if RX < R⋆, the gas disk will
process material directly onto the surface of the white
dwarf and the pollution will be confined to a narrow
band near the equator.
3. ACCRETION BEAM SPATIAL DISTRIBUTION
The accreting material will generally be coupled to
the magnetic field as soon as it becomes gaseous as
ionization takes hold.
This will have important con-
sequences for the spatial distribution of metal pollution
in the white dwarf’s atmosphere. Once bound to the
magnetic field lines, material accreted at a disk radius


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
5
Ω ⋆ [s −1]
10 −6
10 −5
Radius [R ⊙]
10−2
10−1
100
101
B ⋆ [G]
103
104
105
106
Ṁ [g/s]
106
107
108
109
1010
T ⋆ [K]
104
Rc
RB
g
Rs
RR
R ⋆
Figure 2. A comparison of the various important radii in the white dwarf accretion problem as a function of the stellar rotation
rate Ω⋆, magnetic field strength B⋆, mass accretion rate
˙M, and temperature T⋆. The relative location of these radii set the
structure of the disk and the magnetic accretion flow. The Roche radius RR sets the outer edge of the debris disk, the corotation
radius Rc sets where magnetic coupling leads to accretion, the gas magnetic accretion radius Rg
B sets where the gas could be
accreted, and the sublimation radius Rs sets where the dust is sublimated. The dust magnetic accretion radius Rd
B is always
less than the white dwarf radius, and so is not shown.
X [R ⋆]
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
Z [R ⋆]
−7.5
−5.0
−2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
q
0.01
0.1
Dipole
Mixed
Figure 3. The two-dimensional spatial distribution of the
magnetic field lines of the white dwarf.
The dipole field
is shown in black, while a mixed dipole-octupole field with
Γ = 10 is shown as colored lines. The color of the mixed field
indicates the q value that a field line corresponds to. Note
that the small lobes of field at the equator share q values
with the larger field lobes.
RX will be concentrated onto the stellar surface by the
magnetic field. This section derives the size of the in-
coming pollution beam as it strikes the white dwarf’s
atmosphere.
The magnetic field takes the form
B = Boct
2
ξ−5h
(5 cos2 θ −3) cos θ ˆr
+ 3
4(5 cos2 θ −1) sin θ ˆθ
i
+Bdip
2
ξ−3 
2 cos θ ˆr + sin θ ˆθ

+ Bn .
(9)
In Eq. (9), ξ = r/R⋆is the dimensionless radius, Boct
is the octupole field strength, Bdip is the dipole field
strength, and Bn are the high-order field terms. The
polar angle θ is measured from the spin pole of the white
dwarf. If Bn is assumed to be small, F. C. Adams &
S. G. Gregory (2012) showed that the value
q = Γ
4 ξ−3(5 cos2 θ −1) sin2 θ + ξ−1 sin2 θ ,
(10)
where Γ ≡Boct/Bdip, is conserved along magnetic field
lines. For a given point in space, there is a single value
of q, which specifies the field line that passes through
that point. This value can then be used to identify the
location where this field line passes through the surface
of the white dwarf.
Fig. 3 shows the field lines of the white dwarf for both
a pure dipole (Γ = 0) and a mixed dipole-octupole field
(Γ = 10). As expected, the dipole field dominates at
high radius, so the accretion locations will be equivalent.
On the other hand, the field lines in the mixed case are
more tightly spaced at the system pole. As a result, the
mixed field will concentrate the metal pollution into a
narrow region relative to the dipole case.
3.1. Accretion from an Eccentric Disk
In order to derive the pollution region, consider a gen-
eral case where the accretion/debris disk is eccentric and
inclined by some angle I relative to the white dwarf’s


6
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
spin axis. Due to the eccentricity of the disk, the accre-
tion flow will originate from a single point on the disk
(the periapsis) and land at a single point on the sur-
face of the white dwarf.
As the white dwarf rotates,
the magnetic field will sweep across this accretion point
and the material will be accreted onto different points
on the white dwarf’s surface. In addition, the magnetic
field pole will not necessarily be aligned with the ro-
tation axis, but offset by some polar angle β. As the
white dwarf rotates, the angle θ between the magnetic
field pole and the disk periapsis will thus vary.
If ξX = RX/R⋆and the material is accreted from a
polar angle θ relative to the magnetic pole, the angle θ0
at which the accreted material strikes the white dwarf
surface will be the solution to
sin2 θ

ξ−1
X + Γ
4 ξ−3
X
 5 cos2 θ −1

= sin2 θ0

1 + Γ
4 (5 cos2 θ0 −1)

.
(11)
Depending on the value of ξX and Γ, there may be mul-
tiple solutions to Eq. (11). This captures the fact that
octupole field lines may pass through the white dwarf
twice in a single quadrant (see Fig. 3). In this case, the
solution branch that passes through the accretion point
should be used. In general, the accretion point is rela-
tively far from the white dwarf, and the outer solution
will be used. However, occasionally the inner branch is
more appropriate.
For a given magnetic field offset angle β and a phase
ϕ between the white dwarf’s magnetic field pole and the
accretion point,4 the spherical law of cosines provides
the angle θ between the accretion point and the mag-
netic field pole, which can then be used to solve for θ0
in terms of β, I, and ϕ.
For a given configuration of magnetic pole, spin pole,
and accretion disk periapsis, the accretion flow will
strike the white dwarf’s surface at the two points that
are (i) in the plane described by the magnetic pole and
the accretion disk periapsis and (ii) are at an angle
θ0 from the magnetic pole direction. Given these con-
straints, the position angles of the accretion point in the
corotating frame of the white dwarf can be derived. The
detailed equations for these values are given in Appendix
A.
As the white dwarf rotates, the value of ϕ will go from
zero to 2π and the accretion point will move across the
surface of the white dwarf. Fig. 4 shows the regions
of the white dwarf where pollution will be concentrated
for offset angle β = π/6, inclination I = π/4, octupole-
dipole ratio Γ = 1, and accretion distance ξX = 2. The
pollution will be symmetric across the plane normal to
the magnetic field pole, since the accretion will spiral
4 The phase ϕ is defined such that when ϕ = 0 the spin pole,
magnetic field pole, and accretion point are coplanar.
Figure 4. The accretion points on a white dwarf, with an
angle β = π/6 between the magnetic pole and the spin axis,
an inclination I = π/4 between the accretion disk and the
spin axis, the octupole-dipole ratio Γ = 1, and a disk trunca-
tion radius at RX = 2R⋆. The spin axis of the white dwarf
is straight up, while the blue and red points are the poles
of the magnetic field. The blue and red lines show where
accreted metals will strike the atmosphere. For these param-
eters, the red line and point are on the far side of the white
dwarf and are shown as dashed lines. The black line shows
the magnetic field equator. Finally, the black point shows
the direction where the material is accreted from. As the
white dwarf rotates, the points where the accretion strikes
the white dwarf’s surface will sweep out the blue and red
curves.
along the field lines in both directions and strike the
surface twice (see Fig. 1).
Once θ0 has been solved for, the width of the pollution
region dθ0 can be calculated. The chain rule provides
that
dθ0 = dRX
R⋆
∂q
∂ξ (ξX, I)
∂q
∂θ(1, θ0)
−1
.
(12)
Since the gas disk can be approximated as a Shakura-
Sunyaev α-disk, the accretion region in the disk will be
approximately one scale height H in width, since this
is the length scale of the viscous spreading (see, e.g., L.
Hartmann 2009). The scale height at this point and the
accretion region width is given by
dRX = H =
s
2kBTsr3
GM⋆¯m ,
(13)
where Ts is the temperature of sublimation (1500 K) and
¯m = µmp is the average mass of the particle. This takes


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
7
the scaled form
H
R⊙
≃10−4

Rs
0.1 R⊙
3/2 M⋆
M⊙
−1/2 µ
12
−1/2
(14)
where µ is the average particle weight in atomic mass
units.
When combined with Eq.
(12), this equation
provides the width of the accretion band on the white
dwarf surface.
Once accreted to the surface at θ0 with width dθ0,
the pollution beam will cover a total fractional area of
sin θ0dθ0.
This fractional pollution beam area versus
stellar temperature, magnetic field parameter Γ, and ac-
cretion disk inclination I is shown in Fig. 5. In all cases,
β = 0 in this figure. As the white dwarf temperature
increases, the sublimation radius Rs increases, as does
the scale height of the disk. This will therefore widen
the accretion region. However, material accreted from
larger radii will also strike closer to the pole of the white
dwarf and concentrate the accreted material in a smaller
area. It is clear from Fig. 5 that the concentration of
material due to the magnetic field will dominate over the
size of the accretion region, since the covering fraction
scales negatively with temperature.
In addition, the relative strength of the dipole and
octupole fields has significant effects. Since the octupole
component is more concentrated at the white dwarf’s
pole, stronger octupole fields (larger Γ values) result in
smaller pollution beams. In addition, for large Γ values
there is a critical radius at which the solution branch
switches. This effect is the cause of the sharp drop in
pollution beam areas around T⋆≃4000–5000 K for large
Γ values.
Finally, the pollution beam area increases as the ma-
terial is accreted from closer to the magnetic equator
and the inclination increases. Material from the equator
is accreted onto relatively low latitudes, while material
above the magnetic pole is only accreted onto the single
point at the top of the white dwarf. Regardless of the
value of these parameters, however, the covering frac-
tion is never more than 10−4 and the pollution will only
affect a small fraction of the white dwarf’s surface.
3.2. Circularly Symmetric Accretion
This calculation has assumed that the material is ac-
creted from a single point on the disk, presumably the
orbital periapsis. However, apsidal precession will cause
the disk material’s arguments of periapsis to diffuse
away from this point and become uniform. Accretion
from such a disk would then occur from a circular band.
Note that even if each dust grain is on an eccentric orbit,
if the arguments of periapsis are uniformly distributed
then the magnetic accretion will be roughly rotationally
symmetric in the disk plane. In this case, the accretion
flow can be treated as coming from effective inclinations
[I, π/2] relative to the white dwarf spin/magnetic field
axis. In such a circumstance, the fraction of the surface
Fractional Beam Area
10 −7
10 −6
10 −5
10 −4
B Field Ratio Γ
0
5
10
Fractional Beam Area
10 −7
10 −6
10 −5
10 −4
Inclination I
0
𝜋
4
𝜋
2
T ⋆ [K]
104
105
Fractional Beam Area
10 −5
10 −4
10 −3
10 −2
10 −1
Inclination I
0
𝜋
4
𝜋
2
Figure 5. Fraction of the surface polluted by magnetic ac-
cretion as a function of the white dwarf temperature T⋆. The
top panel shows the surface pollution fraction for different
values of the octupole-dipole field ratio Γ with the inclina-
tion of the disk fixed at I = π/2. The middle panel shows
the pollution fraction for variable inclination with Γ = 1.
The bottom panel is the same as the middle panel, but the
accretion disk is set to be circularly symmetric. In all cases,
β = 0. Note that the y-axis scale is different between the
top two panels and the bottom panel.


8
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
that is covered by the polluting beam is given by
f(I) = cos(θ0(ξX, π/2)) −cos(θ0(ξX, I)) .
(15)
The polluting beam fraction for a white dwarf accreting
from an inclined disk is shown in the bottom panel of
Fig. 5. For nearly circumpolar disks (I ≃0), a signifi-
cant fraction of the white dwarf’s surface can be covered
by the beam of accreting metals, although disks aligned
with the white dwarf’s rotation axis will necessarily be
rare due to both spin-orbit coupling and simple geomet-
ric arguments.
4. VERTICAL SINKING AND HORIZONTAL
SPREADING
After the accreted metals strike the surface of the
white dwarf, interactions with the white dwarf’s atmo-
sphere will modify the area of the pollution region. This
section studies the dynamics and timescales for a beam
of ionized material to sink and spread in the atmosphere
of magnetic white dwarfs, which depends on the inter-
actions with atmospheric plasma as well as the relative
vertical sinking and horizontal diffusion timescales. The
behavior of a 40Ca particle will be used as an exam-
ple, since white dwarfs are typically polluted with rock-
forming species like calcium, magnesium, silicon, and
iron (e.g., B. Zuckerman et al. 2007; S. Xu & A. Bonsor
2021; K. D. Putirka & S. Xu 2021; M. Badenas-Agusti
et al. 2024).
A schematic of the typical behavior of this test par-
ticle in the atmosphere of a white dwarf is shown in
Fig. 6. The typical mass and charge of 40Ca ions are
used for these calculations to illustrate the order of mag-
nitude of various effects.
For an ionized 40Ca ion in
the temperature ranges of a white dwarf atmosphere
(T⋆= 7000–35 000 K), the ion mass mZ ≃40 mp and
the typical charge state is Z ≃2. Although the analy-
ses in this section is focused on a polluting 40Ca ion, it
can be readily applied to other polluting elements.
4.1. Initial Stopping Length
As studied in the previous sections, the polar regions
of a magnetic white dwarf will receive a beam of pollut-
ing ions. The penetration depth of this beam into the
white dwarf atmosphere is of critical importance to de-
termining the sinking and convective timescales. If the
beam reaches below the photosphere, then these metals
would be rarely detected. Since the beam’s velocity is
initially tangent to the magnetic field lines, the incoming
metals will experience no Lorentz force from the mag-
netic field. Hence, only the effects of the atmospheric
plasma will be important in stopping the incoming beam
of ionized metals.
The incoming particle will fall at roughly the free-fall
velocity, so the incoming velocity vin is determined by
energy conservation such that (L. Hartmann et al. 2016;
D. Pham et al. 2024),
vin =
s
2GM∗
 1
R∗
−
1
Rg
B

≈
r
2GM∗
R∗
≃4.8 × 108 cm s−1

M∗
0.6 M⊙
1/2 
R∗
0.01 R⊙
1/2
,
(16)
assuming that Rg
B ≫R⋆(see Fig. 2). As these particles
can achieve a high incoming velocity, they can punch
through a portion of the atmosphere before being ther-
malized.
The stopping length, which is the characteristic dis-
tance over which the incoming particle dissipates its in-
coming kinetic energy, is given by Lstop ∼vin/νslow.
Here, 1/νslow is the characteristic timescale on which
the particle is slowed down by the atmospheric ions.
Appendix B shows that νslow is dominated by interac-
tions with electrons. That is, interactions with electrons
are much more effective at slowing down the incoming
particle, compared to interactions with atmospheric hy-
drogen ions. Since the magnetic field can do no work to
these particles, it has no impact on the stopping length.
The stopping length due to interactions with electrons
is a fraction of the atmosphere’s pressure scale height
and takes the form
Lstop,e
LP
≈2.4 × 10−1

vin
4.8 × 108 cm/s

×

νslow
2.0 × 105 s−1
−1 
T
2 × 104 K
−1
×

M∗
0.6 M⊙
 
R∗
0.01 R⊙
−2
.
(17)
The pressure scale height LP for a M∗
= 0.6 M⊙
hydrogen-dominated atmosphere white dwarf at T =
20 000 K is given by LP
∼
(kBTR2
∗)/(GmpM∗)
≃
104 cm. The expression for νslow = νslow,e is given in
Eq. (B7).
Since the white dwarf photosphere’s height is several
pressure scale heights, the incoming particle punches
through a small portion of the photosphere before it is
significantly slowed down. After the stopping length, the
particle is thermalized, with subsequent motion domi-
nated by either collisions or the magnetic field as it con-
tinues to sink down through the rest of the photosphere
and into the convection zone (if there is a convection
zone).
4.2. Collisions and the Magnetic Field
Once thermalized, these polluting particles may either
follow the magnetic field lines or be dominated by scat-
tering from hydrogen ions and electrons. To understand
which process dominates, we compare the magnetic gy-
rofrequency to the collision rates between 40Ca ions and


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
9
Figure 6. Diagram illustrating a DA (hydrogen-dominated) white dwarf’s atmospheric structure and dynamics of incoming
polluting 40Ca ions. Initially, the incoming particle arrived at the top of the atmosphere with velocity vin, punching through
the atmosphere with length Lstop which is a small fraction of the atmospheric pressure scale height. Within the atmosphere,
the particle’s motion can be affected by collisions with atmospheric electrons and ions (characterized by frequencies fe and
fH for collisions with electrons and hydrogen, respectively) or cyclotron motion from the background (characterized by the
gyrofrequency fgyro). There may be a convection zone, which may be beneath or within the photosphere. The bulk motion
of particles in the atmosphere can be described by the spreading timescale τspread and the sinking timescale τsink.
When
τsink ≳τspread, the initial pollution spot can spread globally before sinking, but a pollution gradient remains across the surface.
When τsink ≫τspread, the white dwarf atmosphere will be homogeneously mixed.
τconv is the vertical convective turnover
timescale.
the white dwarf atmosphere’s particles. The magnetic
gyrofrequency is defined as
fgyro = ZeB
mZ
= 4.8 × 108 s−1

B
106 G

,
(18)
where e is the elementary charge, B is the surface mag-
netic field strength, and Z and mZ are the charge state
and mass of the polluting particle.
The collision frequency between an arbitrary polluting
ion and the atmospheric electrons takes the form (J. D.
Huba 2013)
fe = 6.4 × 1011 s−1

ne
5 × 1016 cm−3

×

T
2 × 104 K
−3/2 ln Λe
10

,
(19)
where ne is the electron number density, T is the tem-
perature, and ln Λe ∼10 is the Coulomb logarithm for
electron collisions. In addition, the ion-ion collision fre-
quency between a polluting element and the hydrogen
ions in the atmosphere is given by
fH = 6.7 × 109 s−1

nH
5 × 1016 cm−3
  mZ
mCa
−1/2
×

T
2 × 104 K
−3/2 ZH
1
2 Z
2
2 ln Λi
10

.
(20)
The number densities of electrons ne and hydrogen
ions nH for a completely ionized atmosphere are esti-
mated to be ne ≈nH = ρ/mp, where ρ is the atmo-
sphere’s density and mp is the proton mass. MESA sim-
ulations (see Sec. 4.4) reveal that the photosphere has
a density on the order of ρ ∼10−7 g cm−3, which corre-
sponds to number densities ne = nH ∼5 × 1016 cm−3.
Comparing these values, fe ≫fH ≫fgyro in white
dwarf atmospheres.
Collisions between the polluting
ion and electrons and atmospheric ions are thus orders
of magnitude more important than cyclotron motion in-
duced by the magnetic field. In addition to gyration, the
magnetic field can also induce a mirror force through the
conservation of magnetic moment, which is capable of
reflecting the incoming particle out of the atmosphere
(as seen in the Earth’s ionosphere; F. F. Chen 2016).
However, this effect relies on the conservation of mag-
netic moment and requires that the background mag-


10
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
netic field must be slowly changing over the gyration
timescale. Since the system is strongly collisional once
the particle is within the atmosphere, interactions with
atmospheric electrons and ions will deflect the particle
to nearby magnetic field lines over a gyration period,
violating the magnetic moment adiabatic invariant and
preventing the mirror force in this regime. Since colli-
sion is the dominant process, polluting ions are quickly
thermalized with the atmosphere through many interac-
tions with atmospheric electrons and ions.
4.3. Convection and Magnetic Fields
If the white dwarf’s atmosphere is convective, then
the sinking particle will encounter the convection zone
(which may be beneath or even be contained within the
photosphere), as seen in the diagram in Fig.
6.
We
now quantitatively study the effects of a magnetic field
on convection.
By balancing buoyancy, Coriolis, and
Lorentz forces, it can be shown that the (vertical) con-
vective speed vB in the presence of magnetic field and
rotation is (J. R. Fuentes 2025, private communication)
vB ∼
Fconv
LP
2/3 
4πρ
2ΩB2LP
1/3
(21)
where Fconv is the convective flux, LP the pressure
scale height, ρ the density, Ωthe rotation frequency,
and B the strength of the magnetic field.
Note that
(Fconv/LP )1/3 is the convective speed in the absence of
rotation and magnetic field. For mixing length theory,
the convective flux takes the form (e.g., M. Joyce & J.
Tayar 2023)
Fconv = 1
2ρvcP Tα (∇T −∇ad)
(22)
where v, cP , T, α are the non-magnetic convective veloc-
ity, heat capacity, temperature, and mixing length pa-
rameter, respectively. ∇T and ∇ad are the temperature
and adiabatic temperature gradients.
The convective turnover timescale τconv takes the form
τconv ∼LP
vB
∝B2/3.
(23)
Since the turnover timescale scales with B field strength,
stronger magnetic fields will weaken convection.
In
several τconv, the convection zone becomes well-mixed.
Note that since τconv depends on atmospheric parame-
ters, it varies across the convection zone. Thus, we use
the maximum value achieved by τconv, which is near the
base of the convection zone, as the convective turnover
timescale.
Finally, the turnover timescale is different
than the sinking timescale, τsink, which is the timescale
on which metals leave the convection zone and can no
longer be observable.
In Fig. 7, the ratio τconv/τsink is shown for both hy-
drogen and helium atmosphere white dwarfs (DA and
7000
8000
9000 10000 11000 12000
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
conv /
sink
DA
108 G
104 G
104 G
105 G
106 G
107 G
108 G
conv =
sink
16000 20000 24000 28000 32000
Teff [K]
10
7
10
5
10
3
10
1
101
conv /
sink
DB
108 G
104 G
Figure 7.
Top: The maximum convective turnover time
to sinking time ratio, τconv/τsink, for a hydrogen-dominated
atmosphere white dwarf (abbreviated as DA). The differ-
ent colored curves show this ratio at various magnetic field
strengths ranging from B = 104 −108 G, and the horizon-
tal dashed line shows where the ratio is unity.
When the
ratio is much less than order unity, then the atmosphere is
well-mixed. τconv is calculated from Eq. 21 with the atmo-
sphere convective flux, scale height, and density calculated
by MESA. The metal diffusion timescale at the bottom of
the convection zone τsink is measured by MESA. Quantities
calculated in MESA assumed a regular convection zone with
ML2/α = 0.8 (E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten 2019). The ro-
tation rate Ωis set by the rotation period P, which is cho-
sen to be 2 hr, consistent with many magnetic white dwarfs
(M. S. Hernandez et al. 2024). Note that for hydrogen-dom-
inated atmosphere white dwarfs, when Teff > 12 000 K, the
atmosphere becomes fully radiative. Bottom: Same as top
panel, except for a helium atmosphere white dwarf (abbre-
viated as DB), where the convection zone is simulated with
ML2/α = 1.25 (D. Koester et al. 2020).


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
11
DB, respectively), at various magnetic field strengths.
Atmospheric parameters (density, heat capacity, tem-
perature, gradients, etc.) and the sinking timescales are
computed in MESA in a fully convective atmosphere
(described in Sec. 4.4). For this calculation, we choose
the white dwarf rotation period to be 2 hours, which is
roughly (order of magnitude) consistent with magnetic
white dwarfs’ rotation period (see table 2 and fig. 4 in
M. S. Hernandez et al. 2024). As seen, τconv ≪τsink
for most white dwarf cases, i.e., the metals are well-
mixed throughout the convective zone. This is in agree-
ment to previous works studying the interplay between
magnetism, convection, and element mixing (e.g., P.-E.
Tremblay et al. 2015a; T. Cunningham et al. 2019).
However, the morphology of the convection zone can
still be significantly affected because τconv can still be
changed by orders of magnitude due to the magnetic
field. Therefore, the magnetic field may still impact the
effective metal diffusion (sinking) timescale at the base
of the convection zone, for fields in excess of ∼100 MG
(see Fig. 7). That being said, the effects of magnetism
on the base of the convection zone is complex, and can-
not be modeled with mixing length theory in 1D simula-
tions. Since our simulations are not capable of resolving
the effects of magnetic fields on convection, sinking, or
potential small-scale instabilities, this discussion is de-
ferred to future work.
Full 3D simulations of the at-
mospheres of magnetic white dwarfs are necessary to
quantify the impact of the magnetic fields on the hori-
zontal and vertical diffusion of the polluting metals. As
a first approximation, we consider the sinking timescale
at the two extremes — a complete convection zone and
no convection zone. These limits represent where the
magnetic field is least and most effective at impacting
the convection zone.
4.4. MESA and Sinking Timescale
To calculate the sinking timescales in white dwarfs, we
adopt the MESA (version 10398, B. Paxton et al. 2013)
convection prescription by E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten
(2019), which will be summarized below.
The ML2 convection theory is used, following previ-
ous works (K. H. Bohm & J. Cassinelli 1971; D. Koester
2009, 2010). The fiducial mixing length parameter α has
a value of α = 0.8 (as used in e.g., P.-E. Tremblay et al.
2015b). When the effective temperature Teff > 9000 K,
the gray iterative atmosphere in MESA gives appropri-
ate sinking timescale when compared to previous re-
sults (D. Koester 2009, 2010). When Teff reaches be-
low 9000 K, the atmosphere is switched to using pre-
computed atmosphere white dwarf tables from R. D.
Rohrmann et al. (2012). This switching prescription is
only valid for white dwarfs with deep convection zones
(where the optical depth exceeds τR > 25). These simu-
lations respect this condition, and in no-convection sim-
ulations, no switching is done. The diffusion timescale
of a trace element is calculated from MESA by injecting
the metal at a rate of
˙M = 107 g/s. When the system
has reached equilibrium, the diffusion timescale is cal-
culated according to (G. Vauclair et al. 1979; J. Dupuis
et al. 1992; E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten 2019)
τsink ≡
Mcvz
4πr2ρvdiff
,
(24)
where the convection zone mass Mcvz, radius r, den-
sity ρ, and diffusion velocity vdiff are all provided from
MESA simulations. vdiff is the sedimentation velocity
of a polluting ion measured at the base of convection
zone. If there is no convection zone, the mass of the
photosphere are taken instead. Further details on this
numerical setup can be found in E. B. Bauer & L. Bild-
sten (2019).
In this section, we perform one set of MESA simula-
tions with α = 0.8, following previous work (D. Koester
2009, 2010; E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten 2019). Another
set of simulations without convection are run to sim-
ulate when the magnetic field is most efficient at dis-
rupting the metal diffusion timescale at the base of the
convection zone.
Although partial impacts of this ef-
fect is possible, 1D MESA simulations cannot relate a
given value of α to a specific magnetic field strength.
Therefore, we will only show the results for the two
limiting cases.
Furthermore, while these models only
simulate the diffusion of 40Ca, this methodology is re-
producible with other polluting metals (as done in E. B.
Bauer & L. Bildsten 2019).
We run models for both
hydrogen-dominated (DA) and helium-dominated (DB)
white dwarfs. This section focuses on DA white dwarfs,
while results for DB white dwarfs are discussed in Sec.
4.6.
Fig. 8 shows the sinking timescale as calculated by
MESA simulations for a 0.6 M⊙white dwarf (log g = 8).
As seen, atmospheres become fully radiative for all α
when Teff > 17 000 K.
For a purely radiative atmo-
sphere, there is no convection zone and the diffusion
timescale is calculated using the mass of the photo-
sphere. As the white dwarf cools, hydrogen begins to
recombine at temperatures Teff < 13 000 K, causing a
rapid increase in opacity and inducing significant con-
vection (P.-E. Tremblay et al. 2013). The general behav-
iors of the α = 0.8 models can be compared with results
in E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten (2019) and D. Koester
et al. (2020). In the no-convection case, the lack of a
convection zone leads to a significantly shorter sinking
timescale.
4.5. Horizontal Spreading
Following T. Cunningham et al. (2021), the horizon-
tal and vertical diffusion of the trace polluting metal are
described by a two-component model — a horizontal dif-
fusion component described by the coefficient Dsurf and
an averaged vertical sinking drift described by the ve-
locity vdrift. In equilibrium (steady-state accretion and


12
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
sink [yr] for 40Ca
DA
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
sink [yr] for 40Ca
DB
10
6
10
4
10
2
100
102
sink/ spread
7500
10000 12500 15000 17500
Teff [K]
10
8
10
6
10
4
10
2
100
102
fcov
DA
Globalized
Homogeneous
= 0.8
No convection
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
sink/ spread
15000
20000
25000
30000
35000
Teff [K]
10
4
10
3
10
2
10
1
100
101
102
103
104
fcov
DB
Globalized
Homogeneous
= 1.25
= 0.8
No convection
Figure 8.
Top left: Sinking timescales of 40Ca on a hydrogen-atmosphere white dwarf (0.6 M⊙, log g = 8, abbreviated as
DA) calculated by MESA. Two cases are simulated — full convection with ML2/α = 0.8 and no convection. This latter case
represents the limit where the magnetic field significantly affects the base of the convection zone. The α = 0.8 curve corresponds
to the fiducial mixing length value used in the MESA prescription of E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten (2019). Bottom left: The
pollution gradient parameter fcov (Eq. 28) or the timescale ratio τsink/τspread. The horizontal diffusion coefficient Dsurf is taken
from the 3D radiation hydrodynamics code CO5BOLD (T. Cunningham et al. 2021), which is then used to calculate τspread with
Eq. (27). When fcov is of order unity, the pollution spot can spread over the entire white dwarf surface, but there is still a strong
pollution gradient. Homogeneous pollution can be possible when fcov ≪1. The two shaded regions with their corresponding
labels show these two global and homogeneous pollution limits. Partial convection may be possible (Sec. 4.3), resulting in
covering fractions between the convective and nonconvective limits shown in this figure. Right: Same as the left panels, except
now calculated for a helium-atmosphere white dwarf (log g = 8, abbreviated as DB). Three cases are simulated — convection
with ML2/α = 1.25 (D. Koester et al. 2020), convection with ML2/α = 0.8 (E. Cukanovaite et al. 2019), and no convection.
Note that the vertical scales differ for all four panels.


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
13
metal diffusion), the model can be described by
Dsurf∇2u = vdrift
∂u
∂z .
(25)
where u = u(x, y, z) is the concentration (per unit area)
of the trace metal as a function of position and Dsurf is
the horizontal spreading diffusion coefficient. This equa-
tion assumes that the atmospheric metal concentration
is in a steady-state. While the accretion can be episodic,
introducing time dependence is deferred to future work.
We discuss some potential consequences of asynchronous
accretion in Sec. 6.6.
Over the sinking timescale, τsink, it can be shown that
the metal pollution gradient becomes (see Appendix C)
u(R⋆, τsink) ∝(Dsurfτsink)−1 exp

−τspread
τsink

(26)
where tsink can be measured numerically, and tspread is
the spreading timescale defined by
τspread ≡
R2
∗
4Dsurf
.
(27)
Clearly, when τsink/τspread ≳1, there is a small but
nonzero pollution gradient between the accretion spot
and the antipodal point. Solving the spreading equa-
tion for the fraction fcov of the white dwarf’s surface
that is covered by the pollution (see Appendix C and
Eq. C21) finds that
fcov ≃1
8
τsink
τspread
.
(28)
We emphasize that fcov is not technically a covering
fraction, but instead tracks the pollution gradient across
the surface.
When fcov ≪1, then fcov is the frac-
tion of the white dwarf surface where the abundance
of polluted metals is 1/e of the maximum value. When
fcov ∼1, the pollution spot will spread globally, but
there will still be a strong Gaussian pollution gradi-
ent with a magnitude of 1/e. The atmosphere can only
be homogeneously mixed with polluting elements when
τsink/τspread ≫1 (or fcov ≫1), such that the exponen-
tial term in Eq. (26) asymptotically approaches unity.
At this stage, the only unknown variable is the hor-
izontal diffusion coefficient, Dsurf. We will use the nu-
merical values of Dsurf from table 2 of T. Cunning-
ham et al. (2021), which result from the 3D radiation
hydrodynamics code CO5BOLD (B. Freytag et al. 2012).
Note that these diffusion coefficients are calculated from
non-magnetic white dwarf simulations (T. Cunningham
et al. 2019).
However, since collisions dominate over
magnetic gyration, the diffusion coefficients may still be
correct to the order of magnitude. While the magnetic
field may suppress the small-scale eddies that are criti-
cal to horizontal diffusion, this would reduce the value
of Dsurf.
The pollution regions would therefore take
up a smaller fraction of the white dwarf’s surface, with
important observational consequences. Further 3D sim-
ulations will be necessary to calculate Dsurf on magnetic
white dwarfs.
The ratio τsink/τspread and fcov (the quantity control-
ling the pollution gradient) are also shown in Fig. 8.
The sinking timescale τsink is taken from the MESA sim-
ulations described in Sec. 4.4. Temperatures are limited
at the upper end at Teff = 18 000 K, since Dsurf values
from T. Cunningham et al. (2021) are not available at
higher temperatures. The two limiting cases with full
and no convection are shown, with the expectation that
partial impacts on τsink results would be within those
two limits.
With full convection (α = 0.8), only hydrogen atmo-
sphere white dwarfs with temperature Teff ≲12 000 K
(cooling age ≃3 × 108 yr) will wash out any patchy
pollution.
Thus, if they are accreting metals along
their magnetic field lines, all young hydrogen-dominated
white dwarfs with effective temperatures higher than
∼13 000 K are expected to exhibit localized pollution.
We again emphasize that due to Eq. (26), even if the
spreading timescale is sufficiently long to induce a glob-
alized pollution signature, there is still a gradient of pol-
lution over the white dwarf surface, which may be de-
tectable. As seen in Fig. 8, hydrogen-dominated atmo-
sphere white dwarfs with full convection can only exhibit
homogeneous pollution at temperatures below 8000 K.
For hydrogen atmosphere white dwarfs above this tem-
perature, there is always a gradient of pollution, even in
cases where there is still full convection.
4.6. Helium Atmosphere White Dwarfs
In this section, the previous calculations are repeated
for white dwarfs with a pure helium atmosphere.
The initial beam is strongly slowed by atmospheric
electrons. This beam can only punch through an initial
distance of Lstop,e ≃60 cm, which is approximately 1%
of the atmospheric pressure scale height.
Within the atmosphere, the polluting elements’ mo-
tion will again be dominated by collisions instead of
magnetically induced cyclotron motion, since fe
≫
fHe ≫fgyro.
In addition, these metal ions will be
quickly thermalized due to many interactions with at-
mospheric particles.
The sinking timescale of a 40Ca ion on a pure helium-
dominated atmosphere white dwarf is also calculated
from MESA models.
The prescription in this case is
identical to the case of a hydrogen-dominated white
dwarf, except that we do not switch to pre-computed at-
mosphere tables at any point. In addition, the version of
MESA used in this paper does not have an appropriate
opacity tables for helium below 16 000 K (E. B. Bauer
& L. Bildsten 2019), setting a lower limit on the sim-
ulation temperature. Simulations are again performed
with and without convection, using the ML2 convection
theory in cases with convection. For helium atmosphere


14
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
white dwarfs, the mixing length parameter is typically
set to α = 1.25 (e.g., D. Koester et al. 2020). However,
E. Cukanovaite et al. (2019) argues that α = 0.8 should
be used for more accurate convection zone sizes.
We
thus simulate three cases: α = 1.25, α = 0.8, and no
convection.5
The top right panel of Fig.
8 presents the sink-
ing timescale for 40Ca on a helium atmosphere white
dwarf (log g = 8). Similar to the case of a hydrogen-
dominated atmosphere white dwarf, in the absence of
convection the sinking timescale is several orders of
magnitude lower than convective cases cases.
fcov is
shown in the bottom panel of the same figure.
For
convective helium atmosphere white dwarfs, global-
ized pollution is necessary at temperatures lower than
30 000–26 000 K (depending on α), and homogeneous
surface pollution becomes necessary at temperatures
lower than 20 000–22 000 K. When the sinking timescale
is fully affected by the magnetic field, the pollution zones
will not be spread to the entire white dwarf for the tem-
peratures considered.
4.7. Surface Covering with Initial Beam Size
The discussion of convective spreading has so far as-
sumed that the incoming beam arrives at a single spot
at x = y = 0. Instead, the initial polluting beam will
have some nonzero area, which for the sake of calculation
will be described as a Gaussian with standard deviation
σbeam. It can then be shown that the solution to the
diffusion equation again takes the form of a Gaussian
(see Appendix C). The resulting Gaussian simply mod-
ifies the previously found covering fraction to include
the initial beam size. fcov (the quantity controlling the
pollution gradient) is then estimated as
fcov ≃1
8
τsink
τspread
+ σ2
beam
4R2∗
.
(29)
Thus, the surface covering fraction results in Fig. 8 can
be easily modified by an additional term σ2
beam/4R2
∗to
account for any incoming beam size. Since the polluted
areas generally span orders of magnitude, the pollution
area can generally be taken to be the larger of the beam
area or the surface covering fraction due to spreading.
With Eq. (29), we can fully describe the extent of pol-
lution spreading on a white dwarf, given the incoming
beam size, and the sinking and spreading timescales.
5. OBSERVATIONAL SIGNATURES
5.1. Projected Pollution Covering
Previous sections compute the area of the white
dwarf’s surface that will be polluted by metals. How-
ever, observations of these objects do not sample the
5 The sinking timescales for the ML2/α = 1.25 case are consis-
tent with previous published values (D. Koester et al. 2020),
indicating that this prescription is performing as expected.
Polluted Area Fraction f
10 −4
10 −3
10 −2
10 −1
Projected Polluted Area Fraction f ⟂
10 −4
10 −3
10 −2
10 −1
Viewing Angle 𝛼
0
𝜋
4
𝜋
2
Figure 9. Polluted fraction of the projected visible surface
for a given viewing angle and polluted fraction of the total
surface.
This calculation assumes that β = 0 so that the
projected surface is independent of the phase angle of the
white dwarf’s rotation.
entire surface, but only a projected region. This section
calculates the fraction of the projected area of the white
dwarf that will be polluted in a given observation f⊥.
Consider a white dwarf where a fraction f of the
surface is polluted. Barring extreme disk or magnetic
field geometries, these pollution regions will be concen-
trated into two bands near the magnetic poles of the
white dwarf. These bands will be symmetric about the
magnetic equator and close to axially symmetric about
the pole. Any axial asymmetries will be smoothed out
by the actions of horizontal convective diffusion. Since
these regions will be primarily located at the poles, the
convection will have the additional effect of concentrat-
ing the pollution towards the pole, so that the pollution
region can be approximately modeled as two axisym-
metric caps centered on the magnetic field poles.
On the surface of the white dwarf, an area element
dA(θ, ϕ) = R2 sin θ dθ dϕ has a projected area cos λ dA,
where λ is the angle between the normal of the area
element and the observation vector.
If the observer’s
line of sight is inclined with respect to the magnetic
field axis by a polar angle α, the spherical law of cosines
provides that the projected area element is
dA⊥= R2| sin θ cos ϕ sin α + cos θ cos α| sin θ dθ dϕ .
(30)
Each cap will extend to a polar angle θc = cos−1(1 −
f), where f is the total fraction of the surface that is
polluted. The total projected area of a single cap can
thus be found by integrating Eq. (30) from θ = 0 to
θ = θc.
Note that the observer only sees half of the surface
of the white dwarf, and some of the pollution regions


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
15
are hidden from sight. Since the pollution regions are
azimuthally symmetric and mirrored across the equa-
tor, if any part of the upper region (say, at θ0, ϕ) is in
shadow, a corresponding portion in the lower region (at
π −θ0, ϕ + π) is visible. This can be seen in Eq. (30)
by taking θ →π −θ and ϕ →π + ϕ, which does not
change dA⊥. As a result, only the area of a single cap
is necessary. Therefore, the projected area is given by
f⊥= 1
π
2π
Z
0
dϕ
θc
Z
0
dθ| sin θ cos ϕ sin α + cos θ cos α| sin θ .
(31)
This integral is numerically evaluated with the results
versus f and α shown in Fig. 9. In general, f⊥and f
have the same order of magnitude, with slight correc-
tions for the viewing angle α.
5.2. Effects on Measured Mass Accretion Rate
The concentration of the pollution into a fraction of
the white dwarf’s surface may have significant impacts
on the measured accretion rate. Generally, the metal ac-
cretion rate onto a white dwarf is derived from the metal
line strength in the atmosphere. A given line shape (e.g.,
equivalent width), in combination with the atmospheric
parameters (e.g., temperature, pressure, composition),
implies a certain metal abundance, which must be main-
tained by accreting material. However, the conversion
from line shape to metal abundance generally assumes
that the pollution is spread out across the entire surface
(e.g., J. Dupuis et al. 1993).
If the pollution is actually concentrated in some visi-
ble fraction f⊥, then (to first order) the actual element
abundance X in the polluted region is related to the de-
rived abundance Xobs by Xobs = f⊥X. This equation
assumes that the line strength and shape correlates lin-
early with both the abundance in the pollution region
and the area of the pollution region. While there will be
some nonlinear effects due to changes across the curve
of growth, the metal content in the unpolluted white
dwarf atmosphere, and limb darkening (see T. Cunning-
ham et al. 2021), this relation is correct to order unity.
If the element abundances are close to steady-state,
then the calculated mass accretion rate of a given ele-
ment will also be related to the actual mass accretion
rate by a factor f⊥so that
˙Mobs = f⊥˙M .
(32)
As we have shown in Secs. 2 and 5.1, f⊥∼10−4–10−1,
with significant dependence on the system geometry.
The accretion rates measured for these polluted white
dwarfs may thus be orders of magnitude lower than the
true values.
5.3. Variability
If the magnetic fields concentrate the pollution to
small regions of the white dwarf’s surface, then the
Phase Angle 𝜑
0
𝜋
2
𝜋
3𝜋
2
2π
Projected Polluted Area Fraction
10 −5
10 −4
10 −3
10 −2
10 −1
Total Polluted Area Fraction f
10 −4
10 −3
10 −2
10 −1
Figure 10. Variability in the projected cover fraction from
the rotation of the white dwarf. The viewing angle is set to
α = 60◦and the magnetic field inclination is set to β = 15◦,
matching the model for WD 2138-332. The total polluted
area fraction is set to vary from 10−4–10−1.
strength of the metal lines should vary over the rota-
tion of the star. Here, the observation viewing angle α
is defined to be with respect to the spin axis, β is the
angle between the spin axis and the magnetic field axis,
and φ is the phase angle of the rotation such that φ = 0
when the magnetic field points towards the observer.
Using the spherical law of cosines, the angle between
the magnetic field pole and the observer, here defined to
be λ, is
cos λ = sin α sin β cos φ + cos α cos β .
(33)
Using λ instead of α in Eq. (31) then captures the de-
pendence of the projected fraction on the phase angle.
Note that if β = 0, then Eq. (33) has no φ dependence.
That is to say, there will be no variability if the white
dwarf’s spin pole and rotation axis are aligned.
Fig.
10 shows the variability in the projected pol-
luted area for a white dwarf with β = 15◦, α = 60◦,
and a range of total covering fractions. These values are
chosen to reflect the parameters found for WD 2138-
332, which exhibits clear variability in the metal line
strength and magnetic field strength (S. Bagnulo et al.
2024b). The phases and periods of these variable signals
are identical, strongly suggesting that magnetic accre-
tion is responsible.
If the metal line strength is proportional to the pro-
jected polluted area, then the 0.5 dex variability in the
line strength corresponds to 0.5 dex in the projected area
fraction. In Fig. 10, the topmost curve has a variability
of ∼0.5 dex and corresponds to a total polluted area of
approximately 10 %. In addition, the variability curve
calculated from this model is approximately sinusoidal
for this f value, matching the variability in the data.


16
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
For white dwarfs with significantly smaller polluted ar-
eas, the variability in the metal lines will follow a non-
sinusoidal function that may be detectable.
Of course, the variability will be more complex than
described here, with some additional noise that is diffi-
cult to parametrize. However, the calculation here pro-
vides an order-of-magnitude estimate for the variabil-
ity that could be attributed to rotation.
If aperiodic
variations in measured mass accretion rate are observed
on timescales different that the rotation period, then
episodic accretion is likely responsible, rather than ro-
tation.
6. DISCUSSION
6.1. Observed Variability and Spin Axis
An important conclusion from Sec. 5.3 is that vari-
ability in the projected pollution fraction over the white
dwarf’s spin (e.g., as detected by S. Bagnulo et al. 2024a
and S. Bagnulo et al. 2024b) requires misalignment be-
tween the magnetic field pole and the spin pole of the
system. If the field axis and the spin pole are aligned,
then no such variability will be detected. This is partic-
ularly important in the context of white dwarf magnetic
field measurements, which have found that the magnetic
fields of white dwarfs are symmetric about their rotation
axes (S. Bagnulo & J. D. Landstreet 2024). If the pol-
lution is beamed onto the star by magnetic fields, then
variability will not be detected in these systems. As a
consequence, it is possible that significantly more pol-
luted white dwarfs are only metal-enriched in a small
region, since this patchy pollution could be obscured by
the alignment of the spin and magnetic field poles. For
these white dwarfs, the accretion rates measured via pol-
lution abundances would be underestimated by orders
of magnitude and difficult to detect.
Note that mea-
surements of the mass accretion rate via X-ray emission
luminosities would not be biased in this manner.6
However, in circumstances where this variability can
be detected, the magnitude of the variability and the
shape of the phase dependence depend strongly on the
polluted fraction of the white dwarf’s surface. Measure-
ments of the variability can thus constrain the pollution
area and thereby jointly constrain the convective and
accretion properties of the white dwarf.
Finally, we note that not all photometric variability
can be caused by an inhomogeneous metal distribution
on a white dwarf surface. Indeed, a significant fraction
of magnetic white dwarfs do not exhibit signatures of
metal pollution (J. Farihi et al. 2024).
This variabil-
ity is presumably the result of some form of magnetic
6 While the one measurement of the mass accretion rate through
X-ray luminosity is consistent with the spectroscopic measure-
ments (T. Cunningham et al. 2022), further observations are
needed to determine the impact of this mechanism.
field–induced stellar activity, such as a spot, rather than
heterogeneous metal pollution.
6.2. Observed Magnetic, Metal-Polluted White Dwarfs
The two magnetic, polluted white dwarfs found so
far with evidence of metal patches have temperatures
T⋆≃6250 K and T⋆≃7150 K (S. Bagnulo et al.
2024a,b).
These white dwarfs also both host helium-
dominated atmospheres. This work shows that the in-
homogeneous surface covering on these white dwarfs can
be explained by the concentration of accretion from the
debris disk. We emphasize that the observations of S.
Bagnulo et al. (2024a,b) and J. Farihi et al. (2024) them-
selves do not unambiguously demonstrate suppression of
convection, nor do they directly measure spatial varia-
tions in the total mixed mass across the stellar surface;
those works only detect rotationally modulated line and
field variations, which we interpret here as one possible
signature of localized accretion. As shown in Fig. 5, a
small relative inclination between the polluting gas disk
and the magnetic pole can cause a large surface covering
fraction, up to 10% of the white dwarf’s surface. Notice
that this geometry requires either that the debris disk is
circumpolar or that the magnetic field is highly inclined
relative to the spin pole. The observational data sug-
gest that either β = 15◦and α = 60◦or that β = 60◦
and α = 15◦, with uncertainty due to degeneracies (S.
Bagnulo et al. 2024b). While magnetic field generation
mechanisms would certainly prefer the β = 15◦scenario,
a debris disk is far more likely to orbit the magnetic pole
if β = 60◦, leaving some degeneracy. If this variable pol-
lution is the result of abundance gradients, then either
convection or horizontal spreading must be suppressed,
perhaps by the magnetic field (see Sec. 4.3 and Fig. 8).
If there is no such suppression, then the horizontal con-
vection will easily cause the pollution regions to spread
to the entire white dwarf surface, which is inconsistent
with the observations.
On the other hand, it is also possible for the pres-
ence of a magnetic spot to alter the atmospheric struc-
ture such that the equivalent width of a given metal line
varies over the white dwarf’s surface, even if the com-
position is homogeneous. For example, a starspot pro-
duced by the threading of the magnetic field through the
photosphere would have a different temperature than
the rest of the photosphere. The metals in these spots
would thus have a different equivalent width than the
background photosphere. Such a scenario would explain
the periodically variable metal line strength while allow-
ing for convection. Future studies on line production in
magnetic metal-polluted atmospheres will be necessary
to constrain these possibilities.
6.3. Multiple Polluting Elements
Fig. 8 shows the surface covering fraction for polluting
40Ca ions. However, white dwarfs are polluted with a
combination of multiple elements including carbon, oxy-


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
17
gen, silicon, and magnesium (S. Xu & A. Bonsor 2021).
Furthermore, the two magnetic white dwarfs found in S.
Bagnulo et al. (2024a,b) show pollution signs of magne-
sium and calcium among other heavy metals. Although
these elements may be expected to accrete within a sin-
gle beam, the significantly different sinking timescales
(D. Koester 2009; D. Koester et al. 2020) means that
in this case these elements will pollute different areas of
the white dwarf’s surface, in concentric annuli (see Eq.
28). Observationally, these concentric pollution regions
mean that different elemental lines will exhibit differ-
ent amplitude variability. This effect can potentially ex-
plain the differences in variability amplitudes between
elements in Fig. 2 of S. Bagnulo et al. (2024b), since the
longer diffusion timescale of magnesium versus calcium
or iron (e.g., D. Koester et al. 2020, assuming convec-
tion is unaltered) is approximately the correct factor to
explain the extra 0.08 dex of variability in calcium and
magnesium abundances.
6.4. Inferred Accretion Rate
As shown in Fig. 2, even weak magnetic field strengths
as low as 103 G can cause metal patches on white dwarfs
that cover fractions of a percent of the surface area (Figs.
5, 8, 9). At the same time, Eq. (32) shows that the
observed surface covering fraction of the metal spot may
cause inferred accretion rates to be orders of magnitude
lower than the reality.
If we interpret the observed variability on WD 2138-
332 (S. Bagnulo et al. 2024b) as a signature of surface
metal abundance variations, then under the model de-
veloped in this work, this variability is consistent with
a pollution patch covering only 10 % of the white dwarf
surface.
This model could be tested if further detec-
tions of metal-line variability continue to show covering
fractions of this order of magnitude.
In context, the current inferred white dwarf accretion
rate are ∼106−1010 g s−1, although these estimates are
estimated from modeling of the photospheric metal lines
and are dependent on accretion and stellar atmosphere
models (e.g., J. Farihi et al. 2012; E. B. Bauer & L. Bild-
sten 2018; D. Koester et al. 2020; M. G. Brouwers et al.
2023; S. Blouin & S. Xu 2022). X-ray observations pro-
vide an independent measurement of the accretion rate
in the polluted white dwarf G29-38, where the accretion
rate is found to be ∼1.6×109 g s−1. Furthermore, G29-
38 is a magnetic white dwarf, with a 3σ upper limit on
the magnetic field strength estimated at ∼1.5 kG (J.
Farihi et al. 2018; T. Cunningham et al. 2022). Future
X-ray observations of weakly magnetic polluted white
dwarfs may offer an opportunity to provide an indepen-
dent constraint on the higher intrinsic accretion rates
predicted by the model presented in this work.
Finally, a potential increase of up to 3 dex in inferred
accretion rate may require volatiles in the accretion disk
to facilitate accretion rates higher than can be driven by
the Poynting-Robertson effect (A. Okuya et al. 2023).
In turn, this implies that volatile rich reservoirs7 may
be required to produce observed pollution (e.g., C. E.
O’Connor et al. 2023; T. Akiba et al. 2024; D. Pham
& H. Rein 2024).
At the same time, adding up to
3 dex to measured accretion rates may pose challenges
for some proposed dynamical mechanisms to deliver ma-
terials to white dwarfs.
Mechanisms relying on small
bodies reservoirs like exo–Kuiper Belts, scattered disks,
and Oort Clouds (e.g., J. L. Smallwood et al. 2018; C. E.
O’Connor et al. 2022, 2023; T. Akiba et al. 2024; D.
Pham & H. Rein 2024) will be most affected, since those
reservoirs must be also orders of magnitude more mas-
sive to explain the accretion rates. This may place the
necessary masses in conflict with existing estimates and
constraints from solar system theory and observations.
6.5. Magnetic and Polluted White Dwarf Population
Directly resolving the polluted surface covering frac-
tion for the existing population of polluted white dwarfs
is a challenging endeavor for two reasons.
First, the
magnetic field strength must be measured (e.g., by Zee-
man splitting), which can be difficult to constrain due
to low spectral resolution, especially with cooler white
dwarfs.
Second, spectroscopic variability (similar to
those in S. Bagnulo et al. 2024b) would be needed to
constrain the metal spot size. If the magnetic field is
undetected or if the field pole aligns with the spin pole,
then no variability will be detected and the pollution
concentration may be orders of magnitude larger than
expected.
These two challenges are exacerbated for the popula-
tion of old and strongly magnetic white dwarfs.
One
proposed mechanism to produce strong magnetic fields
on white dwarfs is convective dynamo caused by crystal-
lization (J. Isern et al. 2017; J. R. Fuentes et al. 2024).
This process can only begin to become effective for old
white dwarfs with cooling ages of a few Gyr (S. Ginzburg
et al. 2022). At the same time, if metal settling or hor-
izontal mixing is inhibited (Sec. 4.3), then the metal
spot can be orders of magnitude smaller than the sur-
face area (Fig. 8). Thus, these old, magnetic, polluted
white dwarfs are much more likely to have a small metal
pollution spot that could affect their inferred accretion
by up to several orders of magnitude. Simultaneously,
these objects are relatively faint, thereby reducing the
chance of constraining the pollution spot size to correct
for the inferred accretion rate.
Since direct detection of pollution spots is challenging,
one may instead approach the problem as a population.
The two statistical questions are: (i) what fraction of all
white dwarfs are both polluted and magnetic and (ii)
7 Volatile processing in the accretion disk can produce rocky-
like composition on white dwarf atmospheres (A. Okuya et al.
2023). In addition, the magnetic field can also prevent volatiles
from accreting, likewise producing observed rocky-like polluted
white dwarf compositions (W.-H. Zhou et al. 2024).


18
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
what fraction of polluted white dwarfs are magnetic?
Note that if the fraction of polluted white dwarfs with
magnetic fields and the overall fraction of white dwarfs
that are polluted is known, the product of the two is the
fraction of all white dwarfs that are both polluted and
magnetic.
One approach to answer these questions is through the
observed magnetic and polluted population in volume-
controlled surveys, as done in M. W. O’Brien et al.
(2024) for the local 40 pc volume. Out of the 1076 white
dwarfs identified in this work, 17 are magnetic and pol-
luted (12 helium and 5 hydrogen), giving an occurrence
rate of ∼2% for the entire white dwarf population. This
subset of the white dwarf population is the case of in-
terest for this paper. However, M. W. O’Brien et al.
(2024) found that only 11% of their sample are metal
polluted, as characterized through optical spectroscopy,
a much lower rate than previously found with UV spec-
troscopy (25-50%, e.g., D. Koester et al. 2014; L. B. Ould
Rouis et al. 2024). Thus, a larger population of weakly
magnetic and weakly polluted white dwarfs may remain
undetected in this survey.
Another approach is to independently assess the fre-
quencies for magnetism and pollution. This approach is
motivated by the assumption that mechanisms for gener-
ating magnetic fields in white dwarfs are independent of
the dynamical processes responsible for white dwarf pol-
lution. S. Bagnulo & J. D. Landstreet (2021) performed
a volume-limited survey of magnetic white dwarfs in the
local 20 pc volume, with sensitivity B > 1 kG.
This
field strength is the lower limit of the range considered
in this work. The authors found that 22 ± 4% of white
dwarfs are magnetic, consistent with the magnetism oc-
currence rate in M. W. O’Brien et al. (2024). In parallel,
the occurrence rate of white dwarf pollution in UV spec-
troscopy is 25-50% (D. Koester et al. 2014), with recent
work revising the rate to 45% (L. B. Ould Rouis et al.
2024). Thus, the probabilities for polluted and magnetic
are P(polluted) = 0.25 −0.5 and P(magnetic) = 0.22,
respectively. Under the assumption magnetism and pol-
lution are independent events, we expect that about
P(polluted ∩magnetic) = P(polluted)P(magnetic) ∼
5 −10% of all white dwarfs should be detectable as
both magnetic and polluted when harnessing UV spec-
troscopy, or 1–2% when limited to optical spectroscopy
only.
Furthermore, we can estimate the magnetism occur-
rence rate for the known polluted population, which
is the conditional probability P(magnetic|polluted) =
P(magnetic ∩polluted) / P(polluted) ≃0.2.
That
is, we currently expect that one in five known polluted
white dwarfs should have detectable magnetic fields and
could be subject to the results of this paper.
There-
fore, follow-up multi-epoch time-series spectroscopy on
the known polluted population may be able to uncover
more localized pollution patches like on WD 2138-332.
The frequency of magnetism is not uniform across the
entire white dwarf population, but correlates with white
dwarf age and mass. This dependence is highlighted by
the properties of two clear subpopulations of magnetic
white dwarfs — young, massive magnetic white dwarfs
versus old, low-mass magnetic white dwarfs (S. Bagnulo
& J. D. Landstreet 2022; M. W. O’Brien et al. 2024;
A. Moss et al. 2025). While white dwarfs with magnetic
fields strong enough to cause pollution spots (B ≳1 kG)
may be common, their occurrence rate is complicated by
correlation with age, mass, and observation biases. The
effects described in this paper are expected to be more
significant for older or more massive white dwarfs, and
could be systematically affecting the inferred accretion
rate for polluted white dwarfs in those subpopulations.
6.6. Caveats
The models and results present herein have several
important caveats.
First, we have assumed that the magnetic fields of the
white dwarf can be described as a mixture of a dipole
and octupole component, especially far from the sur-
face. Since each higher-order term decays more rapidly
than the previous term, this assumption will be valid
far from the surface of the white dwarf. Near the sur-
face, higher-order terms may dominate and divert the
material from the expected dipolar position. However,
this effect would likely induce changes in the pollution
beam area of order unity, rather than orders of magni-
tude. Regardless, the coupling of the material to the
field lines means that material will continue to be con-
centrated in regions of high magnetic flux. Other factors
such as diamagnetic screening (A. Cumming et al. 2001)
may systematically lower the magnetic field strength in
accreting systems.
Second, if small dust particles suppress the ionization
fraction of the gas, then the gas may not be well-coupled
to the magnetic field and will not be accreted along the
field lines. In this instance, the material will accrete to
the white dwarf’s equator and likely continue to cover
a small area of the white dwarf’s surface. This scenario
can also occur if ionization is low due to high gas disk
densities or low Na/K abundances. Further work is nec-
essary to understand the precise conditions for magne-
tospheric accretion in these systems.
Third, our results cannot be directly correlated to an
exact magnetic field strength, since we can only perform
MESA simulations for cases with and without convec-
tion. These simulation results are limited by available
horizontal spreading data and opacity tables. Further-
more, as mentioned in Sec. 4.3, magnetic fields may in-
duce small-scale instabilities, and many other complex
effects on the sinking and spreading timescales. These
effects cannot be captured by 1D MESA models. To this
end, we call for future works to simulate a full 3D atmo-
sphere in the presence of a magnetic field, with various
strengths at various temperatures. This is particularly


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
19
important for cooler white dwarfs such as those with
detected patchy accretion, especially with emerging ev-
idence pointing to cooler white dwarfs having stronger
magnetic fields (M. Camisassa et al. 2024; A. Moss et al.
2025).
Fourth,
this
work
uses
a
horizontal
spreading
timescale that is calculated for a non-magnetic white
dwarf from T. Cunningham et al. (2021) and may not
apply in the presence of a strong magnetic field. Un-
fortunately, this is the only such timescale calculation
that exists in the literature. That being said, since col-
lisions with atmospheric ions and not magnetically in-
duced motion dominate the dynamics of the metal ions,
the horizontal spreading timescale may be unaffected by
strong magnetic fields. If the magnetic fields are impor-
tant, they will only suppress the horizontal convection
and thereby shrink the polluted area. As we have shown,
this would imply more significant underestimates of the
mass accretion rate.
Fifth, thermohaline mixing has been predicted to af-
fect the sinking timescales and inferred accretion rates
by orders of magnitude (E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten
2018; E. B. Bauer & L. Bildsten 2019).
Specifically,
including this effect leads to accretion rates 3–4 dex
higher than previously inferred in hot DA white dwarfs
(Teff > 15 000 K).
Likewise, convective overshoot has
been predicted to affect the sinking timescale in hydro-
gen atmosphere white dwarfs by 1–2 orders of magnitude
(T. Cunningham et al. 2019), with an accretion rate up
to 1 dex higher than generally inferred. While neither
of these effects are implemented in our simulations, our
results are reported in terms of the ratio τsink/τspread
and thus can be readily used with any updated sinking
timescales.
Sixth, the polluting particle is assumed to be a trace
component of the atmosphere.
That is, this calcula-
tion has assumed that the number density of metals
nZ ≪na, where na is the number density of atmospheric
ions (H, He, electrons).8 If this condition is no longer
true, such as when the instantaneous accretion rate is
very high, then the opacity of these metals will affect at-
mospheric structures and their various scale heights. In
addition, there will be an additional term in the sinking
timescale calculation due to the gradient of the metal
concentration (J. M. Burgers 1969; C. Paquette et al.
1986; C. Pelletier et al. 1986). In this circumstance, new
simulations must be done to assess the sinking timescale.
Since the measured metal pollution rates may be under-
estimated by orders of magnitude, these effects may be
important in the polluted patches of a white dwarf’s
atmosphere.
8 For completeness, when nZ ∼na, the collision frequencies be-
tween metal ions will become important. Eq. (20) shows that
collisions with electrons will still dominate by orders of magni-
tude and ion-ion collisions can be safely ignored in general.
Seventh, the surface covering fraction in Fig. 8 as-
sumed that the accretion is in a steady-state.
How-
ever, this has been suggested to be a poor approximation
for many white dwarfs (e.g., see Appendix D in M. G.
Brouwers et al. 2023). Episodic accretion would produce
a highly concentrated initial region that spreads across
the white dwarf’s surface over time. Ergo, it may be pos-
sible to detect variability even on white dwarfs with sig-
nificant convection, although the probability of such an
observation would be reduced in comparison to a white
dwarf with a small steady-state surface fraction. While
it is possible to solve the full time-dependent diffusion-
advection equation (Eq. C10), given the significant un-
certainties in both horizontal and vertical timescales dis-
cussed above, we defer this investigation to future stud-
ies.
7. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have produced models of magnetic
accretion of metals onto polluted white dwarfs and the
subsequent evolution of these metals in the atmosphere,
as well as the observational impacts of these processes.
These models are summarized in Figs.
1 and 6 and
briefly below. First, the debris disk around white dwarfs
is assumed to be the result of a tidal disruption event,
with some inclination relative to the white dwarf’s spin
pole. The structure of this disk, including the dust sub-
limation radius and the radii where the magnetic field
will accrete material, are described (Sec. 2). Once the
material is coupled to the magnetic field, it will be ac-
creted onto the white dwarf’s surface in a narrow beam.
The geometry and area of this beam is discussed (Sec.
3).
This model is amenable to a wide range of disk
geometries and is used to study the effects of this ge-
ometry on the incoming beam.
Then, we model the
atmospheric dynamics of the polluting beam, including
the stopping distance of the beam through the atmo-
sphere, the collision and gyro-frequencies of the metals,
and the relevant vertical sinking and surface horizontal
spreading timescales (Sec.
4).
These calculations al-
low us to find the area of the pollution patch on white
dwarf atmospheres across parameter space and to de-
termine sufficient conditions for globalized and homoge-
neous pollution (Fig. 8, Sec. 4.7). Finally, the effects of
a polluted patch on observational signatures such as the
variability and the inferred accretion rate are calculated
in Sec. 5.
Our main results can be summarized as follows:
1. Various radii describing the accretion are calcu-
lated in Fig. 2. First a body is tidally disrupted at
the Roche radius. A dust disk is created, although
this dust disk can never be magnetically accreted.
As the dust drifts inward it will be sublimated,
and then magnetically accreted along field lines.
This magnetic accretion will occur even when the
magnetic field strength is as low as 1 kG.


20
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
2. The debris disk’s orientation relative to the mag-
netic pole can produce orders of magnitude differ-
ence in the polluting beam size, with circumpolar
disk producing the maximum beam size (Fig. 5).
3. Although the incoming velocity of the polluting
beam is high, it cannot punch through a significant
fraction of the atmosphere. Once a polluting ion
is in the white dwarf’s atmosphere, its motion is
dominated by collisions with electrons rather than
magnetic gyration.
4. The metal surface covering fraction on white
dwarfs (Fig. 8) span many orders of magnitude
and are strongly dependent on temperature and
the presence of convection. These results are cal-
culated through the ratio τsink/τspread and can be
adapted for future models of horizontal and verti-
cal diffusion timescales.
5. The model we present here demonstrates that the
variability of WD 2138-332 could be explained as a
surface metal spot approximately 10% of the white
dwarf’s surface area.
6. These models demonstrate that variability in the
accretion signatures can only occur if the spin and
magnetic pole axes are misaligned. Patchy pollu-
tion is therefore difficult to detect.
7. Polluted white dwarfs with unresolved patches
may have true accretion rates up to a few orders of
magnitude larger than measured due to both the
metal spot and the effects of multiple polluting el-
ements.
8. Full three-dimensional models of the atmosphere
of a magnetic white dwarf are necessary to better
understand pollution processes and the impacts of
magnetically-channeled accretion.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the two anonymous reviewers for their help-
ful and detailed comments. We thank Pier-Emmanuel
Tremblay for his insightful comments on the effects of
magnetic fields on convection in white dwarfs and JR
Fuentes for his assistance with the effects of magnetic
fields on the convective turnover time. We thank Fred
Adams, Steve Majeski, Nuria Calvet, Lee Hartmann,
Evan Bauer, Mitchell Begelman, Chris Matzner, and
Alexander Mule for helpful conversations. D.P. acknowl-
edges support from the McCray Postdoctoral Fellowship
at the University of Colorado Boulder. A.G.T. acknowl-
edges support from the Fannie and John Hertz Founda-
tion and the University of Michigan’s Rackham Merit
Fellowship Program.
APPENDIX
A. SURFACE ACCRETION POINT
This section derives the location of the accretion point
on the surface of a white dwarf for a highly eccentric
debris disk with accretion from a single point in the
disk. Consider an offset angle β between the magnetic
field pole and the spin axis of the white dwarf and an
angle ϕ between the magnetic field pole and the location
in the disk where the material is accreted from.
We
can consider this problem in the corotating frame of the
white dwarf and choose ϕ such that ϕ = 0 when the
spin pole, magnetic field pole, and accretion point are
coplanar.
Consider the Cartesian coordinate system where the
spin pole is given by ˆs = ˆz. In this frame, the magnetic
pole vector is
ˆB = sin β ˆx + cos β ˆz
(A1)
and the direction to the accretion point is given by
ˆp = sin I cos ϕ ˆx + sin I sin ϕ ˆy + cos I ˆz .
(A2)
In this equation, I is the inclination between the disk
and the white dwarf’s spin axis.
The angle θ between the accretion point and the mag-
netic field pole is then given by
cos θ = ˆB · ˆp = sin I sin β cos ϕ + cos β cos I .
(A3)
Eq. (11) is then used to solve for θ0, the location where
the accretion flow strikes the white dwarf, as a function
of β, I, and ϕ.
The direction where the accreted material strikes the
white dwarf’s surface, characterized by the unit vector
ˆu, must (i) be in the plane spanned by ˆB and ˆp and (ii)
satisfy ˆu · ˆB = cos θ0. These conditions will be satisfied
by
ˆu = cos θ0 ˆB + sin θ0
sin θ

ˆp −cos θ ˆB

.
(A4)
This vector is a linear combination of ˆB and ˆp and so is
in the plane spanned by these vectors, and is constructed
so that the second condition is satisfied.
In the corotating frame, the position angles φ, ϑ
of the accretion region are therefore given by ϑ =
tan−1(ˆuz/
q
ˆu2x + ˆu2y) and φ = tan−1(ˆuy/ˆux), with ap-
propriate corrections for the domain of the azimuthal
angle φ. Here, φ is the azimuthal angle and ϑ is the
polar angle.


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
21
For a rotating white dwarf, the phase ϕ of the accre-
tion point will rotate from 0 to 2π, leading to variable
accretion locations on the surface of the white dwarf.
This can be accounted for by solving the above equations
to find φ and ϑ for ϕ values across the entire domain.
B. STOPPING LENGTH
This section derives the stopping length of the accre-
tion flow of metals into the photosphere. We show that
the accreting material is stopped in a fraction of the pho-
tosphere and does not penetrate into the white dwarf’s
surface.
Since the incoming velocity vin is very high (Eq. 16),
the thermal energy of the incoming particle is much less
than the kinetic energy for any relevant ionization tem-
perature (∼104 −105 K). Thus, the energy of the in-
coming particle is
Ein ≈1
2mZv2
in
≃4.8 × 10−6 erg
 mZ
mCa
 
vin
4.8 × 108 cm s−1
2
.
(B5)
Here, mZ is the mass of the incoming particle.
As the incoming particle interacts with particles in a
white dwarf atmosphere, its velocity is decelerated as
(see NRL Plasma Formulary, J. D. Huba 2013):
dv
dt = −νslowv,
(B6)
where νslow is due to two sources — atmospheric elec-
trons and atmospheric ions. Due to interactions with
electrons (in the very fast limit), νslow is
νslow,e ≈2.0 × 105 s−1
 mZ
mCa
1/2 Z
2
2
×

Ein
4.8 × 10−6 erg
−3/2 
ne
5 × 1016 cm−3

×
ln Λi,e
10

,
(B7)
where is the charge state of the incoming ion (assumed
to be 40Ca), ne is the electron number density in the
photosphere, and Ein is the kinetic energy of the incom-
ing particles. The Coulomb logarithm for ion-electron
collisions ln Λi,e has typical values on the order of 10.
Likewise, νslow due to interactions with atmospheric hy-
drogen ions is
νslow,H ≈1.1 × 102 s−1
 mZ
mCa
1/2 Z
2
2 ZH
1
2
×

Ein
4.8 × 10−6 erg
−3/2 
ne
5 × 1016 cm−3

×
ln Λi,i
10

,
(B8)
where ZH is the ionization state of the atmospheric ion
and ln Λi,i is the ion-ion Coulomb logarithm. This ex-
pression also assumes that the incoming ion has a much
greater mass than the atmospheric ion, which holds for
most polluting elements of interest in the literature (e.g.,
Ca, Si, Fe) onto hydrogen and helium atmosphere white
dwarfs.
The stopping length is then given by
Lstop ∼
vin
νslow
.
(B9)
As previously calculated, νslow,e ≫νslow,H, giving us
νslow = νslow,e.
C. THE DIFFUSION EQUATION
In this section, we derive the surface abundance of pol-
luting metals across the white dwarf’s surface for hor-
izontal diffusion from a narrow accretion region. This
result sets the size of the pollution region in terms of
the horizontal diffusion and vertical settling timescales.
C.1. Green’s Function
The full time-dependent drift-diffusion equation de-
scribing the horizontal spreading and vertical sinking
concentration of polluting particles is (cf. T. Cunning-
ham et al. 2021)
∂u
∂t = Dsurf∇2u −vdrift
∂u
∂z ,
(C10)
where u = u(t, x, y, z) is the concentration (per unit
area) of the trace metal as a function of time and po-
sition, vdrift is the average vertical sinking velocity, and
Dsurf is the horizontal spreading diffusion coefficient.
In the case of constant accretion from the disk onto
the white dwarf, we seek to model the surface spreading
over coordinate (x, y) and vertical sinking over the depth
z.
Then, the time dependence drops and Eq.
(C10)
equation becomes
Dsurf∇2u = vdrift∂zu ,
(C11)
where we have used the notation ∂zu = ∂u/∂z. The
Laplacian operator is acting on u in (x, y) so that
Dsurf
 ∂2
xu + ∂2
yu

−vdrift∂zu = 0 .
(C12)
This equation is the two-dimensional heat equation in
(x, y) with z instead of the usual time coordinate.
First, we find the solution to this equation when ac-
cretion constantly arrives at a single spot (x, y, z) =
(0, 0, 0), so that the equation becomes
Dsurf
 ∂2
xu + ∂2
yu

−vdrift∂zu = δ(x)δ(y)δ(z) ,
(C13)
where δ is the Dirac delta function. Solving this equa-
tion can be done in various ways and the solution is
well-known. It takes the form
uδ(x, z) =
vdrift
4πDsurf
· z−1 exp

−|x|2
4z
vdrift
Dsurf

(C14)


22
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
where we have defined
x = (x, y) and |x|2 = x2 + y2.
(C15)
Note that the exponential term is in the form of a Gaus-
sian with variance
σ2 ≡2Dsurf
z
vdrift
.
(C16)
Finally, this solution is equivalent to finding the Green’s
function G(x, z) such that G(x, x′, z) ≡uδ(x −x′, z).
C.2. Surface Pollution
The previously found solution can be used to derive
the conditions under which the pollution zone will cover
the entire atmosphere, so that the metal concentration
at the far side of the star (x2 + y2 = R2
⋆) and at the
bottom of the convection zone/photosphere (z = zcvz)
— given by u(x2 + y2 = R2
∗, zcvz) — has the same order
of magnitude as u(0, 0, 0), the concentration under the
pollution beam. With this condition, we can define the
horizontal spreading timescale as
τspread ≡
R2
∗
4Dsurf
.
(C17)
The remaining quantity in the exponential term is
τvert = z/vdrift, which acts as the timescale for vertical
advection from the top of atmosphere at z = 0 to some
depth z. Here, we are interested in the lifetime of an ion
in the observable reservoir, 0 ≤z ≤zcvz, where metal
spreading can still affect the surface pollution spot size.
Metals are transported to the bottom of the convec-
tion zone on a timescale τvert(zcvz) = zcvz/vdrift, while
simultaneously being lost through zcvz on the sinking
timescale τsink (Eq. 24). Since we have a steady-state
model, the downward flux to zcvz must match the rate
at which materials are removed from this layer:
τvert(zcvz) = τsink.
(C18)
This boundary condition is necessary to ensure that ma-
terials do not accumulate at the bottom of the convec-
tion zone, which would violate the steady-state assump-
tion.
With these timescales defined, the solution takes the
form
u(R⋆, τsink) ∝(Dsurfτsink)−1 exp

−τspread
τsink

(C19)
which describes the pollution gradient over the sinking
timescale tsink.
Alternatively, by recognizing that the exponential
term in the solution is a two-dimensional Gaussian with
variance
σ2 ≡2Dsurfτsink
(C20)
and again considering x2 + y2 = R2
⋆, the ratio between
the 1 σ polluted area and the total white dwarf surface
area can be estimated as
fcov ≃πσ2
4πR2∗
= 1
8
τsink
τspread
.
(C21)
C.3. Pollution with an Incoming Beam
Now, we seek to find the solution when the incoming
beam arriving at z = 0 is a Gaussian described by a
variance σbeam and takes the form
u0(x′; z = 0) =

C0
2πσ2
beam

exp

−|x′|2
2σ2
beam

(C22)
where the normalization constant C0 is defined such that
C0 is the total amount of material constantly being de-
livered by the beam,
C0 =
Z
dx′ u0(x′).
(C23)
The solution for this particular initial condition can
be readily found by convolving the source term with the
Green’s function, so that
ub(x, z) =
Z
dx′ G(x, x′, z) u0(x′)
=

C0
2πσ2
eff

exp

−|x|2
2σ2
eff

(C24)
where the new variance is defined as
σ2
eff(z) ≡σ2(z) + σ2
beam
= 2Dsurf
z
vdrift
+ σ2
beam.
(C25)
Since both the Green’s function and our initial condition
are Gaussians, the convolution of the two (the solution)
is also expected to be a Gaussian. Finally, we now find
fcov, the ratio between the 1σ polluted area and the
total white dwarf surface area, with an incoming beam
having a width σbeam as
fcov ≃1
8
τsink
τspread
+ σ2
beam
4R2∗
.
(C26)
REFERENCES
Adams, F. C., & Gregory, S. G. 2012, The Astrophysical
Journal, 744, 55, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/744/1/55
Akiba, T., McIntyre, S., & Madigan, A.-M. 2024, The
Astrophysical Journal Letters, 966, L4,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad394c


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
23
Alcock, C., Fristrom, C. C., & Siegelman, R. 1986, The
Astrophysical Journal, 302, 462, doi: 10.1086/164005
Armitage, P. J. 2020, Astrophysics of planet formation,
Second Edition (Cambridge University Press).
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2020apfs.book.....A
Badenas-Agusti, M., Vanderburg, A., Blouin, S., et al.
2024, MNRAS, 527, 4515, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3362
Bagnulo, S., Farihi, J., Landstreet, J. D., & Folsom, C. P.
2024a, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 963, L22,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad2619
Bagnulo, S., & Landstreet, J. D. 2021, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 507, 5902,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2046
Bagnulo, S., & Landstreet, J. D. 2022, ApJL, 935, L12,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac84d3
Bagnulo, S., & Landstreet, J. D. 2024, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 692, A174,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202451386
Bagnulo, S., Landstreet, J. D., Farihi, J., et al. 2024b,
Astronomy and Astrophysics, 688, L14,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202451215
Balbus, S. A., & Hawley, J. F. 2000, Space Science
Reviews, 92, 39, doi: 10.1023/A:1005293132737
Balduin, T., Woitke, P., Jørgensen, U. G., Thi, W.-F., &
Narita, Y. 2023, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 678, A192,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346442
Bauer, E. B., & Bildsten, L. 2018, ApJL, 859, L19,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aac492
Bauer, E. B., & Bildsten, L. 2019, The Astrophysical
Journal, 872, 96, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0028
Blandford, R. D., & Payne, D. G. 1982, Monthly Notices of
the Royal Astronomical Society, 199, 883,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/199.4.883
Blouin, S., & Xu, S. 2022, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 510, 1059,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab3446
Bohm, K. H., & Cassinelli, J. 1971, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 12, 21.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1971A&A....12...21B
Briggs, G. P., Ferrario, L., Tout, C. A., & Wickramasinghe,
D. T. 2018, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical
Society, 478, 899, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1150
Brouwers, M. G., Buchan, A. M., Bonsor, A., et al. 2023,
MNRAS, 519, 2663, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3317
Burgers, J. M. 1969, Flow equations for composite gases
(New York, NY: Academic Press).
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1969fecg.book.....B
Caiazzo, I., Burdge, K. B., Fuller, J., et al. 2021, Nature,
595, 39–42, doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-03615-y
Camisassa, M., Fuentes, J. R., Schreiber, M. R., et al. 2024,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 691, L21,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202452539
Cantiello, M., Fuller, J., & Bildsten, L. 2016, The
Astrophysical Journal, 824, 14,
doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/824/1/14
Chen, F. F. 2016, Introduction to Plasma Physics and
Controlled Fusion (Switzerland: Springer International
Publishing), doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-22309-4
Cukanovaite, E., Tremblay, P.-E., Freytag, B., et al. 2019,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 490,
1010, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2656
Cumming, A., Zweibel, E., & Bildsten, L. 2001, The
Astrophysical Journal, 557, 958, doi: 10.1086/321658
Cunningham, T., Tremblay, P.-E., Freytag, B., Ludwig,
H.-G., & Koester, D. 2019, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 488, 2503,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1759
Cunningham, T., Wheatley, P. J., Tremblay, P.-E., et al.
2022, Nature, 602, 219, doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04300-w
Cunningham, T., Tremblay, P.-E., Bauer, E. B., et al. 2021,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 503,
1646, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab553
Debes, J. H., & Sigurdsson, S. 2002, The Astrophysical
Journal, 572, 556, doi: 10.1086/340291
Dupuis, J., Fontaine, G., Pelletier, C., & Wesemael, F.
1992, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 82,
505, doi: 10.1086/191728
Dupuis, J., Fontaine, G., Pelletier, C., & Wesemael, F.
1993, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 84,
73, doi: 10.1086/191746
Farihi, J., G¨ansicke, B. T., Wyatt, M. C., et al. 2012,
MNRAS, 424, 464, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.21215.x
Farihi, J., Robert, A., & Walters, N. 2024, Monthly Notices
of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, 529, L164,
doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slae014
Farihi, J., Fossati, L., Wheatley, P. J., et al. 2018, MNRAS,
474, 947, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2664
Ferrario, L., Wickramasinghe, D., & Kawka, A. 2020,
Advances in Space Research, 66, 1025,
doi: 10.1016/j.asr.2019.11.012
Freytag, B., Steffen, M., Ludwig, H.-G., et al. 2012, Journal
of Computational Physics, 231, 919,
doi: 10.1016/j.jcp.2011.09.026
Fromang, S., Terquem, C., & Balbus, S. A. 2002, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 329, 18,
doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2002.04940.x
Fuentes, J. R., Castro-Tapia, M., & Cumming, A. 2024,
The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 964, L15,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad3100


24
Pham, Taylor, & Cunningham
Ghosh, P., & Lamb, F. K. 1978, The Astrophysical Journal,
223, L83, doi: 10.1086/182734
Ginzburg, S., Fuller, J., Kawka, A., & Caiazzo, I. 2022,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 514,
4111, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1363
Goksu, O. A., Kutra, T., & Wu, Y. 2024, The Astronomical
Journal, 167, 236, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad3216
Hartmann, L. 2009, Accretion Processes in Star Formation:
Second Edition (Cambridge University Press).
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2009apsf.book.....H
Hartmann, L., Herczeg, G., & Calvet, N. 2016, Annual
Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics, 54, 135,
doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081915-023347
Hernandez, M. S., Schreiber, M. R., Landstreet, J. D., et al.
2024, MNRAS, 528, 6056, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae307
Huba, J. D. 2013, NRL Plasma Formulary (Washington,
DC: Naval Research Lab.)
Isern, J., Garc´ıa-Berro, E., K¨ulebi, B., & Lor´en-Aguilar, P.
2017, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 836, L28,
doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aa5eae
Ivlev, A. V., Akimkin, V. V., & Caselli, P. 2016, The
Astrophysical Journal, 833, 92,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/833/1/92
Joyce, M., & Tayar, J. 2023, Galaxies, 11, 75,
doi: 10.3390/galaxies11030075
Jura, M. 2003, The Astrophysical Journal, 584, L91,
doi: 10.1086/374036
Jura, M. 2008, The Astronomical Journal, 135, 1785,
doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/135/5/1785
Koester, D. 2009, Astronomy and Astrophysics, 498, 517,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200811468
Koester, D. 2010, Memorie della Societa Astronomica
Italiana, 81, 921. https:
//ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2010MmSAI..81..921K
Koester, D., G¨ansicke, B. T., & Farihi, J. 2014, A&A, 566,
A34, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201423691
Koester, D., Kepler, S. O., & Irwin, A. W. 2020,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 635, A103,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037530
Manser, C. J., G¨ansicke, B. T., Izquierdo, P., et al. 2024,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 531,
L27, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slae026
Metzger, B. D., Rafikov, R. R., & Bochkarev, K. V. 2012,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 423,
505, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20895.x
Moss, A., Kilic, M., Bergeron, P., et al. 2025, The
Astrophysical Journal, 990, 25,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aded8f
Mustill, A. J., Veras, D., & Villaver, E. 2014, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 437, 1404,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1973
O’Brien, M. W., Tremblay, P.-E., Klein, B. L., et al. 2024,
MNRAS, 527, 8687, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3773
Okuya, A., Ida, S., Hyodo, R., & Okuzumi, S. 2023,
MNRAS, 519, 1657, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3522
Ould Rouis, L. B., Hermes, J. J., G¨ansicke, B. T., et al.
2024, ApJ, 976, 156, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad86bb
O’Connor, C. E., Lai, D., & Seligman, D. Z. 2023, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 524, 6181,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2281
O’Connor, C. E., Teyssandier, J., & Lai, D. 2022, Monthly
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 513, 4178,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1189
Paquette, C., Pelletier, C., Fontaine, G., & Michaud, G.
1986, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 61,
177, doi: 10.1086/191111
Paxton, B., Cantiello, M., Arras, P., et al. 2013, The
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series, 208, 4,
doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/208/1/4
Pelletier, C., Fontaine, G., Wesemael, F., Michaud, G., &
Wegner, G. 1986, ApJ, 307, 242, doi: 10.1086/164410
Pham, D., Hopkins, M. J., Lintott, C., Bannister, M. T., &
Rein, H. 2024, The Astrophysical Journal, 977, 232,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad932f
Pham, D., & Rein, H. 2024, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 530, 2526,
doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae986
Putirka, K. D., & Xu, S. 2021, Nature Communications, 12,
6168, doi: 10.1038/s41467-021-26403-8
Rafikov, R. R. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal, 732, L3,
doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/732/1/L3
Rogers, L. K., Manser, C. J., Bonsor, A., et al. 2025,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 537,
L72, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slae117
Rohrmann, R. D., Althaus, L. G., Garc´ıa-Berro, E.,
C´orsico, A. H., & Bertolami, M. M. M. 2012, Astronomy
& Astrophysics, 546, A119,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201219292
Shakura, N. I., & Sunyaev, R. A. 1973, Astronomy and
Astrophysics, 24, 337.
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1973A&A....24..337S
Shu, F. H. 1982, The Physical Universe (University Science
Books).
https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/1982phyn.book.....S
Smallwood, J. L., Martin, R. G., Livio, M., & Lubow, S. H.
2018, MNRAS, 480, 57, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1819
Spitzer, Jr., L., & Tomasko, M. G. 1968, The Astrophysical
Journal, 152, 971, doi: 10.1086/149610


White Dwarf Magnetic Accretion
25
Tout, C. A., Wickramasinghe, D. T., & Ferrario, L. 2004,
Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 355,
L13, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2004.08482.x
Tout, C. A., Wickramasinghe, D. T., Liebert, J., Ferrario,
L., & Pringle, J. E. 2008, Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 387, 897,
doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13291.x
Tremblay, P.-E., Fontaine, G., Freytag, B., et al. 2015a,
The Astrophysical Journal, 812, 19,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/812/1/19
Tremblay, P.-E., Ludwig, H.-G., Freytag, B., et al. 2015b,
The Astrophysical Journal, 799, 142,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/799/2/142
Tremblay, P.-E., Ludwig, H.-G., Steffen, M., & Freytag, B.
2013, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 559, A104,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322318
Trierweiler, I. L., Doyle, A. E., Melis, C., Walsh, K. J., &
Young, E. D. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 936, 30,
doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac86d5
Umebayashi, T., & Nakano, T. 1988, Progress of
Theoretical Physics Supplement, 96, 151,
doi: 10.1143/PTPS.96.151
Vauclair, G., Vauclair, S., & Greenstein, J. L. 1979, A&A,
80, 79
Veras, D., Mustill, A. J., & Bonsor, A. 2024, Reviews in
Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 90, 141,
doi: 10.2138/rmg.2024.90.05
Williams, J. T., G¨ansicke, B. T., Swan, A., et al. 2024,
Astronomy & Astrophysics, 691, A352,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450509
Xu, S., & Bonsor, A. 2021, Elements, 17, 241,
doi: 10.2138/gselements.17.4.241
Xu, S., & Jura, M. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 745,
88, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/745/1/88
Zhou, W.-H., Liu, S.-F., & Lin, D. N. C. 2024, Astronomy
and Astrophysics, 687, A107,
doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202449271
Zuckerman, B., Koester, D., Melis, C., Hansen, B. M., &
Jura, M. 2007, ApJ, 671, 872, doi: 10.1086/522223
Zuckerman, B., Koester, D., Reid, I. N., & H¨unsch, M.
2003, The Astrophysical Journal, 596, 477,
doi: 10.1086/377492
Zuckerman, B., Melis, C., Klein, B., Koester, D., & Jura,
M. 2010, The Astrophysical Journal, 722, 725,
doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/722/1/725
