Title: A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.18193v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 02:16:42 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) Preprint 21 July 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 

# A. Falorca, 1★ A. A. Vidotto, 1

> 1Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, P.O. Box 9513, 2300 RA Leiden, The Netherlands
> Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ

ABSTRACT 

The HeI triplet line (1083 nm), together with hydrodynamic models, can be used to characterize atmospheric escape of exoplanets. However, most of the available models cannot capture the three dimensional (3D) physics of escaping atmospheres, such as tidal forces and the interaction with stellar winds. To investigate how 3D effects affect the helium transit signature, we update our 3D atmospheric evaporation model to self-consistently solve the hydrodynamic equations together with the atomic hydrogen and helium populations. We also produce synthetic helium transits. Our atmospheric escape models assume a Hot Jupiter interacting with stellar wind of ranging mass-loss rates and two XUV fluxes, representative of an old and a young star. Models considering an old star show a decrease of helium triplet density with increasing stellar wind strength, which occurs for two reasons. First, stronger winds reduce the volume of the escaping atmosphere, which decreases obscuration of atmospheric transits. Secondly, as a consequence of a less extended atmosphere, optical depth is reduced, impacting both photoionization and heating, which in turn affect the gas temperature of planetary material, reducing the density of helium triplet. The model assuming a younger star shows an extended outflow, with escape rates 25 times higher. For the same stellar wind strength, the helium transit is 3.3 times deeper than when assuming the XUV of an older star. Weaker stellar winds and/or strong XUV flux allow for pre-transit helium absorption, while all scenarios show (different levels of) post-transit absorptions, described by the presence of a comet-like tail. 

Key words: hydrodynamics – methods: numerical – planets and satellites: atmospheres – planet-star interactions – stars: winds, outflows 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Exoplanets orbiting close to their host stars are prone to undergo atmospheric escape. This may occur through the process of hydro-dynamic escape, likely to happen when the exoplanet is receiving a high flux of extreme ultraviolet radiation and X-rays (hereafter re-ferred to as XUV radiation). This is the driver of photoionization of gas such as hydrogen (H) and helium (He) present in the upper parts of the atmosphere. The flux of stellar photons ionizes the plan-etary atmospheric gas, releasing their excess energy in the form of heat, causing the atmosphere to expand and overcome gravitational forces, resulting in a bulk outflow of atmospheric material (Watson et al. 1981; Lammer et al. 2003). A planetary atmosphere that enters hydrodynamic (HD) escape will depend, among other factors, on the planetary gravity, the XUV flux received and the reservoir of gas material. In extreme cases, the primordial atmosphere can be lost, drastically modifying the nature of the planet (see e.g. Lopez et al. 2012; Owen & Wu 2013; Fossati et al. 2017; Kubyshkina et al. 2018). It is the latter case that leads to theories that explain certain characteristics in population studies, such as the radius gap (Fulton et al. 2017), a scarcity of short orbital period exoplanets within a specific range of radii 1.5 − 2.0𝑅 ⊕ , or the Neptunian desert (Mazeh et al. 2016), where there is a lack  

> ★E-mail: falorca@strw.leidenuniv.nl

of planets of short orbital period, within masses of 0.03 − 0.3𝑀 𝐽 .Additionally, planetary habitability can be significantly influenced by strong hydrodynamic escape (Lingam & Loeb 2018; Dong et al. 2018). Transmission spectroscopy has been commonly used to detect hy-drodynamic escape, with well studied hot Jupiters (HJ henceforth), such as HD209458b (Vidal-Madjar et al. 2003) and HD189733b (Lecavelier Des Etangs et al. 2010; Lecavelier des Etangs et al. 2012; Jensen et al. 2012; Ben-Jaffel & Ballester 2013) showing ex-cess absorption in the hydrogen Lyman-𝛼 line, which probes all the way to the upper atmospheres of these planets. These exoplanets are ideal candidates for atmospheric studies due to their H- and He-rich atmospheres and large scale heights. In addition to hydrogen, a recent spectroscopic signature tracing escape, the metastable helium triplet (He I line) at 1083 nm, has attracted considerable attention. This spectral feature is produced by helium in the state 23S absorbing a photon, resulting in the transition of 23S to 23P. For theoretical stud-ies, see Seager & Sasselov (2000) and Oklopčić & Hirata (2018). Since the first detections of escaping He (see works of Allart et al. 2018; Nortmann et al. 2018; Spake et al. 2018), the number of detec-tions has grown, including for several other exoplanets (Allart et al. 2019; Alonso-Floriano et al. 2019; Guilluy et al. 2020; Kirk et al. 2020; Spake et al. 2021). This new marker has several advantages compared to the traditional hydrogen Lyman-𝛼 line: it is observed both in space-based facilities, as well as in ground-based ones. In  

> ©2026 The Authors arXiv:2607.18193v1 [astro-ph.EP] 20 Jul 2026

# 2 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

addition to this, the core of the He I line is not contaminated as is the case of the Lyman-𝛼 line, which suffers from absorption of inter-stellar medium material and contamination by geocoronal emission (Dos Santos et al. 2020). There have now been over 50 helium triplet transit observations, hence, population studies linking planetary parameters with the ob-served helium triplet absorption have become feasible (e.g., Krishna-murthy & Cowan 2024; Orell-Miquel et al. 2024). However, there is now a large number of non-detections of helium transits in exoplan-ets that were expected to show such a signature. For a compilation of detections and non-detections, we refer the reader to Dos Santos (2021). Possible physical phenomena that impact the predictions and detections of helium transits are the uncertainty in the stellar XUV fluxes rising from the challenge in observing and reconstructing XUV fluxes (Linsky et al. 2013; Behr et al. 2026) and also natural variabil-ity in stellar magnetic activity (Guilluy et al. 2020; Krolikowski et al. 2024; Allan et al. 2025). Another physical process that could affect the helium transit signature (its potential detection and variability) is the presence of a stellar wind, which we investigate in our current study. Interactions with the wind of the host star shape the large-scale morphology of an escaping atmosphere (for reviews on this topic, see e.g. Kubyshkina 2023; Vidotto 2025). From this interaction, sev-eral features can emerge: comet-like tails that trail behind the planet or streams of material headed towards the stellar surface, generally ahead of the planet’s orbital motion. The main characteristics of such structures depend on properties of the system, such as tidal forces, or-bital velocity, and ram pressure of stellar wind (Matsakos et al. 2015; Carroll-Nellenback et al. 2017). Additionally, atmospheric mass-loss rate of the exoplanet can also be affected by the stellar wind (Vidotto & Cleary 2020). To study the effects that stellar wind has on evap-orating atmospheres, we must employ 3D numerical models (e.g. Matsakos et al. 2015; Carroll-Nellenback et al. 2017; Carolan et al. 2021b). However, there are still only a few 3D photoevaporation studies that include the He I marker (Wang & Dai 2018; Shaikhis-lamov et al. 2020; Wang & Dai 2021a,b; MacLeod & Oklopčić 2022; MacLeod et al. 2025; Nail et al. 2024, 2025), some of which do not clearly address the influence of stellar winds in the He I line. In the current work, we perform 3D local hydrodynamic simu-lations of atmospheric escape in a close-in Hot Jupiter, including interaction with the stellar wind. The novelty behind our work is the development of a self-consistent population-chemistry scheme that takes into account hydrogen and helium species. We vary the strength of the stellar wind to investigate its effects on the transit spectral features of the He I line, as well as changing the stellar host. The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 details our 3D H-He hydrodynamic model with incorporated radiation treatment, while also presenting the parameters used in the simulations. Our results are detailed in Section 3. We describe and compute synthetic ob-servations of He I line transits in Section 4. A discussion is present in Section 5, which includes future improvements, and finalize with conclusion in Section 6. 

2 3D MODELLING 

We model atmospheric escape of a Hot Jupiter (HJ) by building upon the works of Carolan et al. (2021b) and Allan et al. (2023). The model presented here is an extensive update of Carolan et al. (2021b), where we now include He species in the previous H-only three-dimensional (3D) HD models. The helium physics follows a close implementation of Allan et al. (2023) and is self-consistently computed (i.e., coupled) with the HD equations. 

2.1 Fluid dynamics 

We use BATS-R-US (Tóth et al. 2005) to simulate hydrodynamic es-cape via photoevaporation of the atmospheres of close-in exoplanets, including the space environment around them. This code has assisted in the study of stellar winds interacting with planetary outflow in sev-eral previous works of our group (e.g., Carolan et al. 2021a; Carolan et al. 2021b; Hazra et al. 2021; Kubyshkina et al. 2022; Presa et al. 2024). The present model uses a multi-species fluid, totaling to 10 the number of hydrodynamic variables in the model: 

• Species mass densities: 𝜌 sp , where sp can stand for: neutral hydrogen H 0, ionized hydrogen H +, helium singlet He (11 𝑆 ), helium triplet He (23 𝑆 ), ionized helium He + and fully ionized helium He ++ .

• Velocity ®𝑣 =(𝑣 𝑥 , 𝑣 𝑦 , 𝑣 𝑧 ). 

• Thermal pressure ( 𝑃 th ). We iteratively solve the set of hydrodynamic equations of mass con-servation 

𝜕 𝜌 𝜕𝑡 + ∇ · ( 𝜌 ®𝑣 ) = 0 (1) momentum conservation 

𝜕 (𝜌 ®𝑣 )

𝜕𝑡 +∇ ·  𝜌 ®𝑣 ®𝑣 + 𝑃 th ˆ𝐼 

= 𝜌 



®𝑔 − 𝐺 𝑀 ★

(𝑟 − 𝑎 )2 ˆ𝑅 − ® Ω ×

 ®Ω × ® 𝑅 



− 2

 ®Ω × ® 𝑣 



,

(2) and energy conservation 

𝜕𝜖 𝜕𝑡 +∇ · (® 𝑣 (𝜖 + 𝑃 th )) 

= 𝜌 



®𝑔 − 𝐺 𝑀 ★

(𝑟 − 𝑎 )2 ˆ𝑅 − ® Ω ×

 ®Ω × ® 𝑅 



· ® 𝑣 + H − C ,

(3) where 𝜌 is the total mass density ( 𝜌 = Ísp 𝜌 sp ), ˆ𝐼 the identity matrix, 

®𝑟 and ®𝑅 the position vectors relative to the center of the planet or the star, respectively, Ω the orbital rotation rate, 𝑀 ★ the stellar mass and ®𝑔 is the acceleration due to the plane’s gravity. Throughout this work, constants related to the stellar host have a subscript ‘ ★’ and the HJ have subscript ‘p’, unless further specification is given. The total energy density 𝜖 is given by: 

𝜖 = 12 𝜌𝑣 2 + 𝑃 th 

𝛾 − 1 , (4) where 𝛾 is the adiabatic index, set to 5/3. The energy conservation (Equation (3)) contains the terms of volumetric heating rate ( H ) and volumetric cooling rate ( C), which will be discussed in Subsection 2.3. 

2.2 Hydrogen and Helium state populations 

In addition to the previous equations, the model also solves six con-tinuity equations for the population of helium and hydrogen 

𝜕 𝜌 sp 

𝜕𝑡 + ∇ ·  𝜌 sp ®𝑣  = [S − 𝔖 ]sp , (5) where Ssp and 𝔖 sp represent the sources and sink rates for each species, respectively. Notice that if we sum over all species the Equa-tion (5), we obtain Equation (1).  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 3 

> Figure 1. Schematic representation of production or annihilation of different He states.

The reaction rates are described in Table A1 and a schematic repre-sentation for the helium population is shown in Figure 1. We consider the following reaction rates: photoionization ( Φ); collisional ioniza-tion ( Ψ); recombination ( 𝛼 ); collisional excitation and collisional de-excitation ( 𝜉 and Ξ); radiative decay ( 𝜑 ) and charge exhange ( 𝜒 ). The sources and sinks of each species (Equation (5)) are calculated as follows: 

• The hydrogen population (i.e., species H 0 and H +) has 

[S − 𝔖 ]H0 = +

n

𝛼 𝐵 [H0] + AH 𝜒 [He +]

o

−

n

Φ[H0] + Ψ [H0] + AH 𝜒 [He (11 𝑆 )] 

o

, (6) and 

[S − 𝔖 ]H0 = − [S − 𝔖 ]H+ . (7) 

• For the helium singlet ground state: 

[S − 𝔖 ]He (11 𝑆 ) = +

n

𝛼 𝐵 [He (11 𝑆 )] + 𝛼 𝐴 −𝐵 [He (11 𝑆 )] + Ξ [He (11 𝑆 )] + AHe 𝜒 [He (11 𝑆 )] + 𝜉 [He (21 𝑆 )] + 𝜉 [He (21 𝑃 )] + 𝜑 [He (11 𝑆 )] 

o

−

n

AHe 𝜒 [He +] + Φ [He (11 𝑆 )] + Ψ [He (11 𝑆 )] + Ξ [He (23 𝑆 )] 

o

. (8) 

• For the helium triplet state: 

[S − 𝔖 ]He (23 𝑆 ) = +

n

𝛼 𝐵 [He (23 𝑆 )] + Ξ [He (23 𝑆 )] 

o

−

n

𝜉 [He (21 𝑆 )] + 𝜉 [He (21 𝑃 )] + Ξ [He (11 𝑆 )] + 𝜑 [He (11 𝑆 )] + Φ [He (23 𝑆 )] + Ψ [He (23 𝑆 )] 

o

. (9) 

• For the singly ionized helium state: 

[S − 𝔖 ]He + = +

n

Φ [He (11 𝑆 )] + Φ [He (23 𝑆 )] + Ψ [He (11 𝑆 )] + Ψ [He (23 𝑆 )] + 𝛼 𝐵 [He +] + AHe 𝜒 [He +]

o

−

n

𝛼 𝐵 [He (11 𝑆 )] + 𝛼 𝐴 −𝐵 [He (11 𝑆 )] + 𝛼 𝐵 [He (23 𝑆 )] + AHe 𝜒 [He (11 𝑆 )] + Φ [He +] + Ψ [He +]

o

. (10) 

• For the doubly ionized helium: 

[S − 𝔖 ]He ++ = +

n

Φ [He +] + Ψ [He +]

o

−

n

𝛼 𝐵 [He +]

o

. (11) There is a detail on the reaction of charge exchange 𝜒 , where hydrogen and helium react together and form different final species. Importantly, in order to preserve mass continuity, we distinguish charge exchange between helium species and hydrogen species by taking the correct species’ mass number (A H = 1, A He = 4). The use of mass number allows us to maintain units of volumetric rate times mass (g cm −3 s−1) for the entirety of the scheme, which justifies the presence of 𝑚 H in the charge exchange rates 𝜒 [sp ] present in Table A1. Although we closely follow the calculation of the helium popu-lation of Allan et al. (2023), we do not account for the population of 21 𝑆 and 21 𝑃 states (similar to other studies in the literature: Ok-lopčić & Hirata 2018; Lampón et al. 2020; Dos Santos et al. 2022). Our assumption of immediate transition from the He (21 𝑆 ), He (21 𝑃 )

states to the ground one He (11 𝑆 ) is justified by the fact that the radia-tive decay rate of the metastable state is several orders of magnitude smaller. In this context, however, 1D works that have included these the He (21 𝑆 ) and He (21 𝑃 ) states (Allan et al. 2023; García Muñoz 2025; Schulik & Owen 2025), did not find any significant impact on the triplet population, as these states instantly become depopulated. 

2.3 Photoionization and Heating/Cooling Processes 

Compared to the monochromatic model of Carolan et al. (2021b), we now separate the incoming radiation into four energy bins, similar to Wang & Dai (2021a); Allan et al. (2023). The resulting wavelength ranges are X-rays, hard EUV (hEUV), soft EUV (sEUV) and mid UV (mUV). We distinguish these wavelength channels by associating each one with a photon energy 𝔢 𝜆 : 𝔢 mUV = 7.0 eV; 𝔢 sEUV = 20 .0 eV; 

𝔢 hEUV = 40 .0 eV; 𝔢 Xray = 248 .0 eV. The literature values of pho-toionization energy cost for each species E sp are: E H0 = 13 .6 eV; EHe (11 𝑆 ) = 24 .6 eV; E He (23 𝑆 ) = 4.8 eV and E He + = 54 .4 eV. The model requires values of individual optical depths 𝜏 𝜆 to ac-count for photoionization rates and heating. This is employed under  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# 4 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

the plane-parallel ray approximation. 

𝜏 𝜆 =∑︁ 

> sp

𝜏 𝜆 [sp ] =∑︁ 

> sp

∫ final 𝑥  

> start 𝑥

𝑛 sp 𝜎 sp ,𝜆 𝑑𝑥 , (12) where 𝜎 sp ,𝜆 is the wavelength-dependent photoionization cross-section, valid only when E sp ≤ 𝔢 𝜆 , i.e., the species is able to be ionized by a photon. The integration is performed starting at the leftmost boundary ( −𝑥 ) from where the flux is coming. The cross-sections for species H 0, He (11 𝑆 ), He + follow the theoretical fits provided by Verner et al. (1996). The triplet species He (23 𝑆 ) uses the same parameters outlined in Biassoni et al. (2024). The plane-parallel approximation performs computationally well in our Carte-sian grid, however it can have non-physical effects on the exten-sion of the photoionization and heating deposition. For example, the nightside of the planet should see an umbra cone extended up to 

∼ 𝑎 /( 𝑅 ★ 

> 𝑅 𝑝

− 1) ≃ 10 𝑅 𝑝 , instead of an infinite cylinder of no radiation. Given that the density of material falls off very quickly, at ∼ 10 𝑅 𝑝 

in the nightside of the planet, the material there has such low den-sity that its contribution should be negligible to the synthetic transits we later compute. Additionally, there is a loss of flux conservation, since the plane-parallel radiation does not follow the inverse square law. This only corresponds to a difference of ≲ 20% at distances of the order of 𝑅 ★, impacting minimally heating and photoionization closer to the planet. The work of Yan et al. (2022) has compared in more detail spherical-spherical radiative transfer model to a plane-parallel model, finding that the latter can lead to enhanced absorption features. The rate of photoionization for a given species and for a given wavelength-channel is given by: 

Φ𝜆 [sp ] = F𝜆 𝜔 sp ,𝜆 exp (− 𝜏 𝜆 )𝜎 sp ,𝜆 

1

𝔢 𝜆 

, (13) where F𝜆 is the flux of the corresponding wavelength and 𝜔 sp ,𝜆 is the weighting factor that prevents the same photon from photoionizing multiple species, as defined in Allan et al. (2023): 

𝜔 sp ,𝜆 = 𝑛 sp 𝜎 sp ,𝜆 

Ísp 𝑛 sp 𝜎 sp ,𝜆 

. (14) If we sum Φ𝜆 [sp ] over the photoionization channels, we obtain 

Φ[sp ], as present in Equations (6) to (11). We use a specific numer-ical treatment to calculate exp (− 𝜏 𝜆 ), as a means to avoid truncation errors, described in Appendix B. The volumetric heating rate that is inserted in the atmosphere by the excess energy from the photoionizing photons is given by: 

Hsp ,𝜆 = 𝛿 sp ,𝜆 𝔢 𝜆 Φ𝜆 [sp ]𝑛 sp 

= 𝛿 sp ,𝜆 F𝜆 𝜔 sp ,𝜆 exp (− 𝜏 𝜆 )𝜎 sp ,𝜆 𝑛 sp ,

where 𝛿 sp ,𝜆 =  1 − Esp /𝔢 𝜆 

 accounts for the proportional excess in energy. The heating term incorporated in Equation (3) corresponds to the summation of Hsp ,𝜆 over all species and wavelengths. Here, each channel’s flux value F𝜆 is constant over the entire grid: it is the optical depth term exp (− 𝜏 ) that dynamically informs the model about the local absorption of the incoming radiation. In addition to the stellar flux, our model also accounts for the contribution of photons originated in the recombination of He + to He (11 𝑆 ), with 𝔢 𝜆 [ 𝛼 ] = 24 .6 eV, as done in Allan et al. (2023). We assume that these released photons act locally, produced with a rate equal to the weighted rate of the recombination process Φ𝜆 [ 𝛼 ] [sp ] =

𝜔 sp ,𝜆 [ 𝛼 ] 𝛼 A-B . This contribution is added to the photoionization rate of the affected species (H 0, He (11 𝑆 ), He (23 𝑆 )) and the same applies to the excess heating produced. Moreover, our model computes 12 volumetric cooling rates shown in Table A2. These contributions come from hydrogen and from he-lium collisions - both collisional ionization and collisional excitation - and recombination. Free-free emission cooling is stated in a way that already entails the entire species population contribution. These cooling terms were derived by Black (1981) and Cen (1992), but we use the same transformation present in Allan et al. (2023) for the collisional excitation of helium triplet. In essence, this modification uses the explicit number density of He (23 𝑆 ) that the code computes, instead of assuming a steady-state solution dominated by recombi-nation ( 𝑛 He (23 𝑆 ) ∝ 𝑇 −0.6687 𝑛 e𝑛 He + ) as done by Black (1981) - this would have been incorrect in our case. It is the summation of all these cooling terms that make up the cooling term C in Equation (3). As a final remark, reaction rates and volumetric heating and cool-ing rates are not computed for fluid predominantly ( ≳ 98% ) com-posed of stellar wind. This condition is defined using a passive scalar variable, which distinguishes gas that has advected from a planetary or stellar boundary condition. 

2.4 Simulation Setup 

In our models, we use a cartesian grid with the following limits: 

𝑥, 𝑦 = [− 48 , 48 ] 𝑅 𝑝 and 𝑧 = [− 32 , 32 ] 𝑅 𝑝 . The planet is located at the origin of this grid, defined by fixed inner boundary conditions at 𝑟 = 1.0 𝑅 𝑝 . In this inner boundary, we set fixed base number density 𝑛 0 and temperature 𝑇 𝑝 , and the velocity uses a reflective boundary condition. We assume the Hot Jupiter to be tidally locked, such that the star is always in the −𝑥 direction, while the planet orbits in the +𝑦 direction, on the plane 𝑧 = 0. At the outer boundaries, all variables are under inflow limiting boundary condition, except for the 

𝑦𝑧 plane at the −𝑥 boundary. In the latter, we follow the procedure from Carolan et al. (2021a): we inject the stellar wind assuming a 1D isothermal model (Parker 1965), which is computed by choosing two free parameters, the stellar wind mass-loss rate ( ¤M★) and stellar wind temperature ( 𝑇 ★), which in turn set both the density and velocity radial profiles. Having the stellar outflow profile, we orient the stellar wind at the −𝑥 boundary to flow radially away from the star, also taking into account the Coriolis force −2 ®Ω × ® 𝑣 and centrifugal force 

− ® Ω × ( ® Ω × ® 𝑟 ), necessary to convert into the planet’s reference frame. The HD equations are solved using a second-order numerical scheme with Linde flux limiter and minmod slope limiter to cal-culate the Riemann Problem fluxes at cell interfaces. Advancing the time step follows an explicit second-order temporal scheme with a Courant-Friedrichs-Lewy (CFL) number set to 0.25. All our models are initially ran in ‘Steady-State Mode’, i.e., differ-ent time steps are used in different grid cells – limited by the local stability conditions. This method accelerates convergence towards steady state, but it does not have a physical temporal information. We typically run our models for at least 60 thousand iterations until simulations reach global steady state. After that, we run our models for an additional 2-minute of physical evolution (i.e., using ‘Time Accurate Mode’), so that the metastable population converges into a smooth solution. There are a couple of procedures we implement in our runs to ver-ify and mitigate potential spurious effects in the outflow dynamics. For example, we start our models only incorporating the planetary outflow (including XUV irradiation, but no orbital motion, no ro-tation). We run the code until this is approximately in steady state (around 6 to 8 thousand iterations). We compare this output with outputs of 1D models to confirm they have the same solution. Then, we turn on Coriolis and tidal forces and again wait until the solution reaches steady state (another 6 to 8 thousand iterations). Only after  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 5

this we inject the stellar wind in the grid. This is the usual approach in our models. This has two benefits: 1) we carefully check the evo-lution of the dynamics at each intermediate setup; and 2) we save computational resources as we can use the same output at iteration 

∼ 16000 for multiple runs with different stellar wind conditions. In some cases, we can further speed convergence by using the final output of one model ( S8.0 ) as input to another model ( S0.1 ). Previous to any numerical step, the grid starts in its minimal reso-lution, defined by the extent of the Cartesian domain and the number of blocks of cells for each direction. Then, we let the adaptive mesh refinement evolve the base grid until reaching the desired (maximum) level of refinement in each region. The adopted regions are: 

• Around the planet, we have a resolution of 1/32 𝑅 𝑝 in a shell between 𝑟 = 𝑅 𝑝 and 𝑟 = 3 𝑅 𝑝 .

• Adjacently, follows another shell with cell resolution 1/16 𝑅 𝑝 ,until 𝑟 = 5 𝑅 𝑝 .

• These shells are inscribed in a cylinder, with its central axis pointing in the 𝑥 direction, with a radius of 7.5 𝑅 𝑝 and a height of 

50 𝑅 𝑝 , centered at ®𝑟 = (5, 0, 0) 𝑅 𝑝 . This cylinder possesses a cell resolution of 1/8 𝑅 𝑝 .

• We implemented an additional rotated ellipsoidal region of res-olution 1/4 𝑅 𝑝 . The latter geometry allows us to better resolve the planetary outflow under the influence of orbital motions and tidal forces. Once these refinements are finished, we turn off the adaptive mesh refinement and the grid remains the same until the end of the run. At each level of refinement, a certain cell is split into 2 in each direction (therefore increasing the resolution by a factor of 2, with the old cell splitting into 8 cells). Only one level of refinement is added (or removed) at an iteration, which implies we perform a series of refinements. We experimented with how frequently the subsequent refinement levels can be implemented without breaking the code. Usually, the numerical computation runs smoothly when we build the grid within the first 10 iterations (in this case, there is nearly no evolution on the initial conditions set on the grid). However, past tests also showed that, depending on the characteristics of the system and the assumed initial conditions, a slower build of the grid might be necessary. Figure 2 displays the different levels of resolution in the grid. In total, each simulation has around 19 .7 million cells. We point out that the resolution applied in these models is much higher than the previous models of pure H atmosphere (Carolan et al. 2021a), as the study of complex He-physics scheme required higher resolution. Altogether, Equations (1) to (3) describe the fluid dynamics, cou-pled to the population balance Equations (5) to (11). In summary, our model considers photoionization, recombination, collisional ion-ization, excitation and de-excitation, charge exchange and radiative decay - as defined in Table A1. In addition to this, cooling and heating are also calculated simultaneously with the scheme’s species population. 

2.5 Modelling Parameters 

The photoionization process is the driver of the escaping atmosphere, hence the importance of XUV flux from the host star. The incorpo-rated fluxes for the two solar-like stars considered in this study are detailed in Table 1 as input parameters. The first star (Star 1) has a mass of 𝑀 ★, 1 = 1.1𝑀 ⊙ , radius of 𝑅 ★, 1 = 1.2𝑅 ⊙ and a stellar spec-trum taken from France et al. (2016) (see Figure 3 of Allan et al. (2023)), corresponding to an old ( ∼ 5.6 Gyr) K-star. The second star (Star 2) has a larger mass 𝑀 ★, 2 = 1.3𝑀 ⊙ but smaller radius 

𝑅 ★, 2 = 1.1𝑅 ⊙ (Vauclair et al. 2008). The spectrum is presented in                      

> Figure 2. Grid blocks in 𝑧 =0(top) and 𝑦 =0(bottom) planes showing the different resolution regions assumed in our simulations. The orange circle depicts the Hot Jupiter boundaries; the light blue circle defines the highest resolved part of the grid, the sphere with radius 3𝑅 𝑝 , followed by a blue circle showing the next resolved concentric sphere of radius 5𝑅 𝑝 ; then is the horizontal cylinder marked by the pink line, and finally, the rotated elongated ellipsoid as the last resolved part of the grid, the large dark blue ellipsoid. Each grid block has 4×4×4cells.

Allan et al. (2025), corresponding to 𝜄 -Hor during a maximum phase of its activity cycle. Because this star is young ( ∼ 625 Myr), the fluxes in all channels are much higher than the first star, in particular the mid-UV and X-ray channels. To explore the differences in the adopted stellar spectra, our sim-ulated exoplanet is unaltered: it orbits the host star at 𝑎 = 0.05 AU, has a mass of 𝑀 𝑝 = 0.67 𝑀 𝐽 and a radius of 𝑅 𝑝 = 1.37 𝑅 𝐽 .The Hill radius present in Table 1, 𝑟 H = 𝑎  𝑀 𝑝 /3𝑀 ★

1/3 ∼ 6 𝑅 𝑝 

is similar in both stellar inputs. At the base of the (upper) at-mosphere, we consider a fixed temperature 𝑇 𝑝 = 1000 K and a base density 𝜌 0 = 3 × 10 −13 g cm −3. These values are informed by the values at the top of the lower atmosphere from 1D mod-els of Allan et al. (2023). In addition, we fix the species ratios in our inner boundary. The ratio of He to H in the base of the planetary outflow is [He /H] 𝑝 = (𝑛 He /𝑛 H) 𝑝 = 19 = 0.111 , a ratio higher than the one applied to the stellar wind [He /H]★ = 0.068 ,resembling our solar values (Kasper et al. 2007). The individ-ual species ratios are written with respect to n H, and ordered as 

{H0 : H+ : He (11 𝑆 ) : He (23 𝑆 ) : He + : He ++ }:

• At the planetary launch base: {∼ ( 1.0 − [ He /H] 𝑝 ) : 10 −5 :

0.9[He /H] 𝑝 : 10 −7 [He /H] 𝑝 : 0.1[He /H] 𝑝 : 10 −7 [He /H] 𝑝 }. This assumes a mostly neutral atmosphere at the base of the hydrodynamic escape. 

• For the stellar wind: {10 −10 : ∼ (1.0 − [ He /H]★) : 

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# 6 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

10 −13 [He /H]★ : 10 −13 [He /H]★ : 10 −5 [He /H]★ : [He /H]★}. This implies a nearly fully ionized stellar wind. We initialize our computational domain with a 1D velocity 𝛽 

profile, taking the form 𝑢 𝑟 = 𝑢 ∞ (1 − 𝑟 −1)𝛽 , where 𝑢 ∞ is the terminal velocity of the outflow. From mass conservation, we then initialize the density in the grid at the planetary boundary as 𝑛 (𝑟 ) = 𝑛 0𝑟 −2𝑢 0/𝑢 𝑟 .We follow the same approach as Carolan et al. (2021b), in which we first allow the planetary outflow to relax in the grid, before turning on tidal and Coriolis forces. Once this has relaxed, we inject the stellar wind through the −𝑥 boundary until the system has reached a (quasi-)steady state. To explore the effects of the stellar wind (SW) on the helium transit, we adopt several different stellar wind conditions for Star 1 and one wind condition for Star 2, as shown in Table 1. The stellar wind mass-loss rates vary between 5 × 10 −16 and 1 × 10 −12 𝑀 ⊙ yr −1, and we assume the wind is injected with the same velocity profile in all models. At the boundary point of  𝑥 = −48 𝑅 𝑝 , 𝑦 = 𝑧 = 0, located at a distance of ∼ 3.3𝑅 ★, 1 to the star, the wind, in the reference frame of the star, has a radial velocity of 29 km s −1, which is obtained from assuming an isothermal stellar wind with temperature of 10 6 K. Our grid is therefore in the acceleration zone of the stellar wind. For reference, the current solar mass-loss rate is ∼ 2 × 10 −14 𝑀 ⊙ yr −1,thus our simulations have 1/40 × (S0.1 ), 10 × (S40 and S40F ) or 

50 × (S200 ) the solar wind mass-loss rate, where the symbols inside the parenthesis are the IDs of our simulation runs (note that these numbers refer to mass-loss rates in units of 5 × 10 −15 𝑀 ⊙ yr −1). We use the exoplanetary mass-loss rate ¤M 𝑝 as one of the evaluators to consider the simulations have reached a desired final steady-state. It is calculated as: 

¤M𝑝 =

∮

> Σ

𝜌 ®𝑣 · 𝑑 ®Σ , (15) where Σ is a chosen closed spherical shell of radius r , and 𝜌 ®𝑣 is the mass flux. In Table 1 it is possible to see the planetary mass-loss rate for each different model, taken as an average between r = 2 𝑅 𝑝 and 

r = 20 𝑅 𝑝 .To evaluate the impact of different resolution levels in the grid, we computed the mass-loss rate over closed shells of different radii. While the mass-loss rate should remain constant with distance, we observe small discontinuous drops ( < 0.5% ) in ¤M𝑝 slightly after 

r = 3𝑅 𝑝 , r = 5𝑅 𝑝 and r = 7.5𝑅 𝑝 , which are corresponding positions of change in cell resolution. 

3 RESULTS 

The typical morphology that we find in such cases ( S8.0 , S40 , S200 )has a comet-tail like structure, where most of the up-orbit outflow is redirected towards the orbital path behind the planet. However, we also have cases where the outflow and SW interaction behaves cyclically - in a quasi-steady state. These are S0.1 , S1.6 and S40F .This is because the extension of photoevaporated material into a frontward arm is subject to turbulence in the flow-flow interaction (e.g., see right panel of Figure 3; movies showing the progress of simulations can be found here.). Figure 3 shows 3D views of S40 and S40F , where it is possible to distinguish the different outflow geometries that arise from the interaction between a planet’s outflow with two different stellar hosts, but sharing the same stellar wind conditions. The planet is shown as the central black sphere, with velocity streamlines colored by their object of origin: orange lines for planetary material and blue lines for the stellar wind. Density is displayed by several isosurfaces that have been cut for 𝑧 > 0 in the full view panel, while the insets show a close-in look to the launch of the outflow without this blanking condition. The dark blue closed isosurface is related to the passive scalar variable. This delimits the region where most of the material is originally from the escaping planetary atmosphere (within the isosurface), and beyond which, the material is predominantly stellar wind. Note that the extension of the planetary outflow arises naturally in our 3D models. Such a feature is not possible to obtain through 1D models, where most of the times the outflow extension is defined apriori (for example, stopping at the Hill radius, as in Caldiroli et al. 2021, or at a fixed distance, as in Allan et al. 2023). It is possible to associate different morphologies of hydrodynamic escape with typical distances embedded in each star-planet system (Matsakos et al. 2015). Although this is beyond the scope of this work, we see that these characteristic lengths - like the Hill radius ( 𝑟 H) and the distance to flow-flow interaction ( 𝑑 shock ) - can entail quite distinct synthetic spectra, highlighting the need of 3D models in computing the extension of escaping atmospheres. Given that some simulations show planetary outflows extending to the boundaries before reaching steady-state, we have checked for boundary effects that could artifi-cially impact the system’s dynamics. Our analysis confirms that no erratic behavior is taking place, both in total energy or in the velocity profiles. 

3.1 Effects of stellar wind on the Helium population 

For the purpose of our discussion, we will focus on the cases S0.1 ,

S40 , S200 , which assume the same stellar XUV flux, but varying stellar wind mass-loss rates ( 1/40 , 10 and 50 times the solar values). Figure 4 shows contours of fluid density (top), absolute velocity (middle) and temperature (bottom panels) in the orbital ( 𝑧 = 0) plane. There are also other informative lines, such as the pale yellow line in the upper plots, which traces the sonic surface at Mach number 

Ma = 1, and velocity streamlines in the middle panels. We see that the strengthening of SW causes the volume occupied by the planetary material to decrease, as expected (e.g., Carolan et al. 2021a). Model 

S0.1 shows the largest volume occupied by the planet’s escaping material, with a clear presence ahead of orbit, while S40 and S200 

have the outflowing gas funneled into a comet-like tail structure. In the middle panels, the absolute velocity of the planetary gas indicates a turbulent structure when interacting with a low SW strength ( S0.1 )similarly to the case S40F discussed before. As for models S40 and 

S200 , the escaping material is strongly advected to the nightside and behind orbit. The planetary material reaches typical velocities of ∼ 20 km s −1 at the tail of S0.1 and up to ∼ 90 km s −1 for S200 .Finally, the bottom panels show the temperature structures, where we can distinguish shocks by jumps in temperature. We emphasize the different temperatures of the outflowing gas (shades of blue and cyan) in the different tails behind orbit: S0.1 outflow is mostly cold (𝑇 ∼ 5 × 10 3 K) and does not go over 1.2 × 10 4K, while S200 is above 10 4 K nearly over the entire volume. The shock is formed at the point where there is pressure balance between the stellar wind and the planetary outflow. We take the distance of the bow shock, dshock , to be where this condition takes place the furthest in the planet’s dayside (stated in Table 1). We can find dshock bigger than the sonic point ( |v| = 𝑐 𝑠 at 𝑟 sonic ) in case S0.1 

(and S40F ), where the flow is transonic; and when this condition fails, the outflow is considered a breeze. Case S0.1 , for example, develops an extended front-arm of cold gas that is highly influenced by orbital effects, since the stellar wind wraps around this stream-like structure. Thus, material starting its launch on the dayside of the  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 7

Table 1. Summary of the adopted parameters of our models, as well as global output values. The columns related to the input parameters are: the model ID, the host star ID, the stellar host radiation fluxes in four different energy bands (see text), the stellar wind mass-loss rate ( ¤M★) and the size of the Hill sphere ( 𝑟 H). The columns related to the output of our simulations are: the planetary mass-loss rate ( ¤M 𝑝 ) and the distance to the flow-flow interaction region ( dshock ). Model Star FX−ray FhEUV FsEUV FmUV ¤M★ 𝑟 H ¤M 𝑝 dshock 

(10 3 erg cm −2 s−1) (5 × 10 −15 𝑀 ⊙ yr −1) (𝑅 𝑝 ) (10 10 gs −1) (𝑅 𝑝 )

S0.1 

Star 1 0.15 1.0 0.8 50 0.1

6.2 

1.1 12 .0

S1.6 1.6 1.1 10 .0

S8.0 8.0 0.9 2.9

S40 40 1.0 2.0

S200 200 1.0 1.5

S40F Star 2 18 15 22 4300 40 5.9 24 .6 33 .0

Figure 3. 3D view of the modeled evaporating planetary atmosphere S40 (left) and S40F (right), which have the same stellar wind mass-loss rates, but different stellar XUV fluxes. We show the exoplanet as the black sphere, with total density ( 𝜌 ) displayed in several isosurfaces - these have been cut for 𝑧 > 0 in the full view panels - and velocity streamlines are colored by association to an initial planetary outflow (orange) or stellar (blue) wind. The dark blue outer closed isosurface delimits where the gas is made up of mostly planetary material. The insets show a closer view of the planet. 

exoplanet, crosses the sonic surface ( 𝑟 sonic = 3.9 𝑅 𝑝 ) and is pushed ahead of orbit, becoming a transonic flow. Models S40 and S200 have the dayside-launched gas quickly advected to the nightside. Thus, this material starts its escape in a breeze condition and finds a transonic solution on the rather stable comet-like tail structure. Figure C1 introduces additional information such as total volu-metric heating rate, total volumetric cooling rate and PdV work. The volumetric heating rate has contributions from the flux heating, which is the release of excess energy from stellar flux photoioniza-tion, and recombination heating, from photons ( 𝜆 𝛼 ) originated in the recombination process 𝛼 A-B that add to the existing photoionization. When integrating heating over volume, PH , we find recombination to be the leading heat source for all models of Star 1. The nightside close to the planet only has heating contributions from the recom-bination photons. On the other hand, we have 12 cooling sources - Table A2 - with hydrogen recombination cooling as the leading coolant inside the planetary outflow. In the middle row, we observe that the total cooling increases in the come-like tail region as the stellar wind strength rises from left to right. From an increase in the stellar mass-loss rate, we see that pressure balance takes place closer to the planet, with steeper gradients of temperature. This impacts the underlying properties of the outflow, originating contrasting differ-ences in the population results. For example, both S40 and S200 show similar comet-like tails of outflowing material. But as a consequence of decreasing the available volume for heating, increasing cooling and PdV work (Equation (4)), it originates a tail with enhanced gas temperatures. Figure 5 shows the ratios of He species by the following or-der: helium triplet (top panels), ionized helium (middle) and doubly ionized helium (bottom). These were calculated as 𝑛 sp /𝑛 He , where 

𝑛 He = 𝑛 He (11 𝑆 ) + 𝑛 He (23 𝑆 ) + 𝑛 He + + 𝑛 He ++ . The first row displays different fraction values and structures, indicating that the species He (23 𝑆 ) is influenced by stellar winds. In the case of S0.1 , we see that the species He (23 𝑆 ) in the planetary outflow is enhanced and extends over large distances, both in front and trailing the planet. Focusing on the central region of the outflows ( 𝑟 ≲ 7.5 𝑅 𝑝 ) and tail, we find relative triplet fractions of the order ∼ 10 −5 in S0.1 ,

∼ 5 × 10 −6 for S40 and ≲ 10 −6 for S200 . Models S40 and S200 do 

MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) 8 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto       

> Figure 4. 2D view of the density (top), total velocity (middle) and temperature (bottom) of models S0.1 ,S40 ,S200 and S40F . The pale yellow line shows the sonic surface and the streamlines represent the velocity.

not reach such high fractions of triplet state in their comet-like tail, except for the flank region of the shock. As we will discuss below (Section 5), this has consequences for helium transits. In these spe-cific flank regions at the shock, He triplet fractions can reach values of order ≳ 10 −5 for S40 and S200 . The middle plots of Figure 5 show the first ionized state of He. The red line marks where the total gas ionization level is 90% , while the blue line marks where the helium gas is 90% ionized. The state He + is the dominant state of He in the evaporating atmosphere, except by state He (11 𝑆 ) close to the base of the launch ( ≲ 2 𝑅 𝑝 ) and in the nightside. The lower row displays the second ionized state He ++ , the state that makes up most of the He in the hot stellar wind that shocks with a colder, denser and less ionized gas. There, two cyan lines mark where the ratio of doubly ionized to ionized He 𝑛 He ++ /𝑛 He + is 0.01% (inner closed line) and 

1.0% (outer closed line). The planetary species He ++ is mostly ab-sent in the cold planetary outflow, only becoming enhanced in highly turbulent regions that mix with the stellar He ++ .Our findings reveal, comparatively, that for stronger stellar winds, the tail-like outflow shows decreasing helium triplet fractions, only being specifically enhanced in the flank zone of the shock. Close to the exoplanet ( 𝑟 < 2.5𝑅 𝑝 ), the fractions of He + and He ++ are low, since the optical depth for photoionization is high and temperature is low. In a cold planetary outflow ( 𝑇 ≲ 1.5 × 10 4 K) at larger distances, the He + species dominate, quickly reaching 𝑛 He + /𝑛 He = 0.9, mostly by photoionization of the singlet state. Moreover, as seen in the case of S200 , the highly compressed atmosphere in the tail promotes the He ++ state to the second most abundant state with 𝑛 He ++ /𝑛 He ∼ 0.1.We remind the reader that this is only relative to He species, as the ionized H is still the overall dominant gas particle. To deepen the analysis on the population of all species, Figure 6  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 9                   

> Figure 5. 2D view in the orbital plane 𝑧 =0of the fraction of the He species: triplet (He (23𝑆 )), ionized helium (He +) and doubly ionized helium (He ++ ) for the top, middle and bottom rows, respectively. Each column corresponds to a distinct model. The red line marks 𝑛 ion =0.9, the blue line marks 𝑛 He-ion =0.9
> and the cyan lines mark where 𝑛 He ++ /𝑛 He +is 10 −4and 0.01 for the inner and outer lines, respectively.

shows the fraction of species compared to the total number of species along the 𝑥 axis (i.e., the star-planet line) for S0.1 . We specify the extent of the stellar wind (SW), the shock and the planetary atmo-sphere (Atm). We see that, far from the planet, the population of species varies sharply due to the stellar wind. For close-in regions, there is an asymmetry of populations for dayside ( −𝑥 ) and nightside (+𝑥 ). Given that in the nightside of the planet stellar photons cannot ionize helium, intuitively, we would have expected a low fraction of He + and He ++ in the nightside, but this is not what we found. These ions are created in atmospheric regions that are unshielded to stel-lar photonionisation (e.g., from the +𝑦 direction) and subsequently advected to the nightside. An interesting consequence of this is that, because He + is the primary reservoir of He (23 𝑆 ) via recombination (𝛼 B [He (23 𝑆 )] ), we also see an enhancement of the triplet species in the nightside of the planet. We discuss the importance of considering the advection terms in 3D models in Appendix D. The extensive reaction chain underlying this model makes the analysis of each species somewhat lengthy, so we focus mainly on the helium triplet here. Figure 7 depicts the contributing rates for the triplet, in the 𝑥𝑦 plane, for the same model as before, S0.1 . For S40 

and S200 , see Figures C2 and C3, respectively. These plots aid our understanding on large scale spatial contributions of each reaction (de)populating the triplet. We see that He (23 𝑆 ) balances itself mainly between recombination 𝛼 B [He (23 𝑆 )] and collisional de-excitation 

𝜉 [He (21 𝑆 )] . Moreover, close to the planet, some reaction rates barely contribute to the net rate of the species, as seen in several 1D works (Allan et al. 2023; Taylor et al. 2025; García Muñoz 2025). However,  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# 10 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto        

> Figure 6. Comparison between ratio of individual species to total number of species, following the line connecting the star to the planet ( 𝑧 =0,𝑦 =0), for the case S0.1 . The central brownish region represents the planetary surface. The filled pink regions target the space where the flow is subsonic. Above the x-axis are displayed the 3 distinct regions of the model: stellar wind (‘SW’), the shock and the planetary atmosphere that is outflowing (‘Atm’).

our 3D models show that they become important in the flow-flow interaction zone. In a case of a very weak stellar wind (Figure 7), triplet-destructive rates like collisional ionization Ψ[He (23 𝑆 )] or the populating rate, collisional excitation Ξ[He (23 𝑆 )] , add insignificantly to the triplet’s net rate. Whereas for a mild to strong stellar wind interacting with the photoevaporated gas - as we can see from Figures C2 and C3 -these rates can become extremely relevant at the shock zone. This is explained by an increase in electron number density being mixed with the gas and local temperature increase. Contrastingly, the rate of collisional de-excitation of He triplet into He singlet by means of a free H 0 (Ξ[He (11 𝑆 )] , first panel in the middle row) is only relevant for distances close to the planet, as this region contains most neutral H species. Thus, we have shown that the seemingly non-contributing rates for defining the population along the cold planetary outflow turn out to be relevant when stellar wind is present, as the hot mixed region enhances these rates. This region becomes a rich zone of population-chemistry, as is also depicted in Figure 5, where the fractions of He species are prone to change strongly. In Figures C5 and C6 we plot the net rate of species, which is defined as the summed contribution of the sources minus the sinks for each species R [ sp ] = [S − 𝔖 ]sp .

3.2 Effects of stellar flux on the Helium population 

We now move on to the atmospheric model of a more irradiated planet. In S40F , we use a high energy spectrum and a stellar wind of 10 times the solar wind mass-loss rate, the same value as adopted in 

S40 . Therefore, by comparing S40 and S40F , we gain insight in the helium population for the case where only the XUV flux varies. The rightmost panels in Figure 4 show the density, absolute ve-locity and temperature of S40F , where we see a dayside transonic escape with several shock structures inside the planetary outflow. The immense photoionizing power derived from an extremely high XUV flux from the star results in a high mass-loss rate (Table 1), and consequently, a strong ram pressure that leads to an extended and quasi-steady arm of material ahead of orbit. By comparing with the model S40 , the planet’s mass-loss rate ¤M𝑝 increases ∼ 25 times. For this system, the sonic radius ( 𝑟 sonic ≈ 2.1 𝑅 𝑝 ) is ∼ 1.8× closer to the planet, also smaller than the largely unaltered Hill radius. Thus, the outflowing gas extends ahead of orbit through strong acceleration and heating. In contrast with the turbulent S0.1 model, this front-ward arm evolves somewhat a cyclically – increasing and decreasing its extension towards the star. The right panels in Figure C1 show that a large volume of material exhibits strong heating. We compute the volume integral of the vol-umetric heating and cooling rates, starting at the planetary radius up to a distance 𝑟 𝑓 , which provides us the total heating and cooling pow-ers ( PH , PC respectively). The results at 𝑟 𝑓 = 3 𝑅 𝑝 show powers of PH = 4.5 × 10 24 erg s −1 and PC = 7 × 10 23 erg s −1. Comparing with the previous set of models, cooling showed similar values of total power, while heating showed PH = 1.8 × 10 24 erg s −1, mainly due to recombination. The S40F -dominant heating channels are the photoionization of H 0 by sEUV photons, or He + by X-rays close to the shock zones. Thus, there is a clear stellar flux heating dominance in S40F , in contrast with a shared heating between recombination (main contributor) and stellar flux in S0.1 to S200 .Figure C4 shows the triplet reaction rates and the bottom right panel in Figure C5 shows the net rate of the same species. There is no significant region of triplet enhancement, even though all rates now display higher values. Spatially close to the planet, we have re-combination 𝛼 B [He (23 𝑆 )] and collisional de-excitation 𝜉 [He (21 𝑆 )] 

as the leading sources and sinks of triplet, respectively. However, at 𝑟 ∼ 3 𝑅 𝑝 in the dayside of the planet, the main sink becomes photoionization Φ[He (23 𝑆 )] , as mid-UV photons are ∼ 86 × higher than the previous set of models. As we are now dealing with stronger fluxes, which facilitates the ionization of neutral He, the dayside point at which gas becomes mainly ionized is now at 𝑟 ∼ 1.3 𝑅 𝑝 . For that reason, we can see in the right panels of Figure 5 that both ionized He species make up most of the outflowing volume of material. The fraction of triplet at close distances to the exoplanet is around the order of 4 × 10 −6, but for 𝑟 > 10 𝑅 𝑝 ahead of orbit the density of  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 11           

> Figure 7. 2D view in the orbital plane 𝑧 =0of all contributing reactions rates to the population of He triplet for the model S0.1 . Top and middle rows: annihilating rates. Bottom row: populating rates. Note that the contribution of photoionization ( Φ) is incomplete, as photons that originate from the recombination reaction will also contribute. Figures C2, C3 and C4 show the equivalent plots for models S40 ,S200 and S40F . Figure C5 shows the net rate.

triplet drops to ≲ ×10 −6. The flux of X-ray photons is also ∼ 121 

times higher, which enhances photoionization in this channel, which strongly ionises He + to He ++ . The cyan line countours on the Figure 5 support this: the outer closed contour that marks 𝑛 He ++ /𝑛 He + = 1% 

is found at the shock of S0.1 , but well inside the planetary outflow for a stronger flux case. When comparing the fraction of He ++ in the tail between S40 and S40F , we find respectively 𝑛 He ++ /𝑛 He ≲ 10 −3

compared with 𝑛 He ++ /𝑛 He ≲ 10 −1.

4 SYNTHETIC SPECTRA 4.1 Radiation Transfer Setup 

After reaching a final state, we run each simulation output through a ray-tracing model to retrieve synthetic transmission spectra. We use the ray-tracing model described in Carolan et al. (2021a), with the line parameters of the helium triplet line, which is composed of three individual lines, with line-center wavelengths of 𝜆 1 = 10829 .09114 

Å, 𝜆 2 = 10830 .25010 Å and 𝜆 3 = 10830 .33977 Å in air. The Ein-stein coefficient is 1.0216 × 10 7 s−1 for all lines; their corresponding oscillator strengths are 0.059902 , 0.17974 , 0.29958 (extracted from the NIST database, Kramida et al. 2024). The He I line transit is the added contribution of each of these individual line transits. We assume a uniform specific intensity over the stellar disc at a given frequency (i.e., no limb darkening) and the line profiles are calculated for a null impact parameter. With the model parameters, we obtain a transit time of 𝑡 T = 3.22 h for S0.1 , S40 , S200 and 

𝑡 T = 3.44 h for S40F .We show in Figure 8 the synthetic spectra of excess absorption (in percentage) as a function of wavelength for the He I line for four of our models. The transmitted spectra are shown for different transit  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# 12 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

times, highlighting first contact (T1), mid-transit (MT) at 𝑡 = 0h and fourth contact (T4). These times are marked in the colorbars of each plot, and in the figure, we display only the time where obscuration exists by the planetary material above an excess threshold of 0.05%. Models S0.1 and S40F show the largest peak absorptions at 2.8% 

and 3.8% , respectively. On the other hand, S40 and S200 only reach 

1.0% and 0.8% at mid-transit. The weaker stellar wind model ( S0.1 )shows clear pre-transit obscuration (early ingress), more than 3h prior to transit, with its T1 contact point having an excess absorption of around 1.1% . An early ingress is not seen for models of enhanced stellar wind ( S40 and S200 ), as these have the bow shock quite close to the planet (i.e., the atmosphere does not extend substantially ahead of the orbital motion). With the exception of models S40 and S200 ,all models presented in Table 1 show considerable obscuration after the last contact point T4, this is, in post-transit. S0.1 shows a large blueshifted absorption of ∼ 0.3% excess absorption up to 3h after T4. Lastly, S40F also exhibits absorption of ∼ 2.0% prior to ingress and after egress. Due to the 3D nature of our models, added by the geometric reshaping of the planetary material by interaction with stellar winds, we see an asymmetric distribution of outflowing material around the planet. These bulk outflows generate spatially distinct regions of column densities with various line-of-sight velocities, ranging from 

−120 km s −1 to +50 km s −1, in the case of S40F , for example. In the case of a weaker stellar wind ( S0.1 ) the early ingress material (i.e., the frontward arm) is accelerated away from the planet towards the star, that is, away from the observer, causing the HeI absorption at T1 and prior ingress times to be mostly redshifted. It is also possible to notice an enhanced redshift feature in model S40F . In contrast, at T4 and later egress times, only S0.1 shows a blueshifted absorption, emerging from most of the stream of gas in the tail being accelerated away from the planet. This only happens when the nightside advected gas has a large enough column-density. For cases of enhanced stellar wind ( S40 and S200 ) or boosted stellar wind and XUV flux ( S40F ), the tail is rarefied in triplet due to increase in temperature or stronger photoionization, respectively. Moreover, models S40 and S200 are also heavily influenced by in-teracting with stellar winds. Both cases show absorption from strong blueshifted gas ( ∼ − 90 km s −1), which originates an excess absorp-tion of ≲ 0.1% at lower wavelengths ( 𝜆 < 𝜆 1). Model S40 how-ever, has a tail of material substantially distinct: the triplet density at the core can be up to an order of magnitude higher compared to 

S200 . This allows for higher absorption around the HeI forming lines (𝜆 1,2,3), avoiding the dip between 𝜆 1 and 𝜆 2,3 that exists in model 

S200 . Adding to these, the temperature of the gas will cause thermal broadening. As seen in Figure 4, the temperature in the frontward arm of S40F reaches 𝑇 ≈ 10 4K, which leads to a wider, although smaller, prior to mid-transit spectra. As the profiles in Figure 8 are the summation of 3 lines, these plots contain multiple effects coming from a range of triplet densities, flow velocities and temperatures at each wavelength. We also investigated the variability of the peak absorption and the equivalent width (EW) for the models that do not reach a clear steady state. In the case of model S0.1 , we see the peak absorption during transit varying around ±7% over the time of evolution, and EW ranging within a relative deviation of ∼ 5% from the average. The model S1.6 sees the strongest changes, mainly due to the disruption of the extended bulk of planetary material up-orbit. Lastly, we see in S40F that the peak EW vary less than ±10% . A summary of the key properties of the synthetic spectra calculated for all models are shown in Table 2. Figure 9 shows the EW of excess absorption as a function of                                       

> Table 2. Key properties of the synthetic transmission spectra: duration of obscuration by atmospheric material (which extends beyond T1 and T4), the minimum and maximum peak absorption between T1 and T4, and its time average, and the time average of EW for all models. Model Duration Peak (%) EW (mÅ) (h) min Tmax T<> T<> T
> S0.1 12 .21.12.82.526 .7
> S1.6 11 .60.71.91.720 .4
> S8.0 9.50.31.21.111 .3
> S40 4.90.31.01.08.1
> S200 4.50.30.90.87.1
> S40F 9.72.13.83.346 .8

time. In this plot, vertical shaded regions show the contact points between T1 and T4. We use an inset plot for model S40F because it is a different stellar system, thus having different transit times. As seen previously, S0.1 and S40F have clear pre-transit signal, which indicates the presence of escaping material ahead of orbit. We find a range of post-transit signals: when the volume of the tail is small, as seen for cases S40 and S200 , EW quickly drops after transit. Likewise, when the radiation environment is strong, the tail reaches stronger ionization states, leading to a lower column-density. From comparison between models, we confirm that comet-tail like outflows that have colder and less ionized gas provide for more extended light curves after egress. 

4.2 How do these results relate to observations? 

Several transiting exoplanets have been observed with the HeI line in a variety of ground-based or space facilities. Here, we bridge our synthetic results with an overall association to observed spectra. Model S0.1 relates to systems with extended long tidal arms and tails, either due to a weak stellar wind or a strong tidal deformation, such as HAT-P-32b (Zhang et al. 2023), HAT-P-67b (Gully-Santiago et al. 2024) and WASP-121b (Czesla, S. et al. 2024; Allart et al. 2025a). Such systems tied to small Roche lobes are possible strongly evaporating exoplanets, which are expected to relate to several hours of excess absorption. Additionally, strong photoevaporation ( ¤M𝑝 ≳

10 12 g/s) can also relate to high stellar XUV flux, as seen by the 

20 × increase in mass loss from models S40 and S40F . Asymmetric transits, like case HAT-P-67b, can be a good probe to study the combination of tidal effects with stellar radiation, since the leading material obscures strongly for several hours in pre-transit, while the tail seems triplet deficient. The stellar wind influence throughout models S8.0 , S40 and S200 

is key to correctly characterize a planet’s evaporation, or even to in-terpret some tentative detections. From several dedicated programs at observing HeI transits, such as MOPYS (Orell-Miquel et al. 2024), GAPS (Guilluy et al. 2024), and others (Vissapragada et al. 2022; Allart et al. 2023; Saidel et al. 2026), it seems that commonly con-firmed He evaporating targets are hot-/warm-/sub Neptunes, often with transit signals with small EWs and short periods of obscuration after their transit. These can be interpreted as signature of comet-like tails, which are shaped due to the interaction of the planetary outflow with the stellar wind. A compatible example with our simulations is the small hot-Jupiter WASP-69b (see works by Nortmann et al. 2018; Tyler et al. 2024; Allart et al. 2025b), that has a confirmed trailing tail of evaporating material, of which He is included. Systems like these could be useful for retrieving stellar host mass-loss rate. How- 

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 13 

Figure 8. Excess absorption of the He I line for all our simulations at different times. The solid lines corresponding to first contact (‘T1’), mid-transit ( 𝑡 = 0h) ‘MT’ and fourth contact (‘T4’) points are marked in the colorbar of transit time. This illustrates that planetary material might be transiting before T1 (early-ingress) or after T4 (late-egress). The vertical red dashed lines show the three centers of the He I line. Models are identified in the top left corner. 

Figure 9. Equivalent width (EW) of excess absorption of the He I line as a function of transit time for all models. The contact points of ingress (T1-T2) and egress (T3-T4) are annotated and shaded in light violet, and the T2-T3 transit in darker violet. 

ever, a more detailed evaluation seems necessary for interpreting data variability (e.g., whether due to variation in XUV flux, stellar wind, magnetic cycles, etc, Krolikowski et al. 2024; Sanz-Forcada et al. 2025; Allan et al. 2025). Lastly, from our models S40 , S200 and S40F , we found that a reduced density in He triplet can be due to strong wind confinement or by high mid-UV and X-ray radiation. This raises the question of what are the factors that promote an extremely small (or non-existent) transit observed in the HeI line. Many such cases have been reported in the literature, of which some examples are: GJ 1214b, HD 97658b and GJ 9827d (Kasper et al. 2020); TRAPPIST-1b, e, and f (Krishnamurthy et al. 2021); K2-100b and V1298 Tau c (Alam et al. 2024) and HD 63433b with (Zhang et al. 2022; Alam et al. 2024), among others. Non-detections of evaporating helium triplet are usually interpreted as lack of atmospheric escape or low helium abundance (e.g., secondary atmosphere). For this reason, for cases of young planets, which are thought to possess helium-rich primary atmospheres, the lack of a clear detection should be evaluated under the aforementioned effects (see e.g., Fossati et al. 2022, 2023; Allan & Vidotto 2025). 

MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) 14 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

5 DISCUSSION 5.1 Stellar wind effects through the HeI line 

The stellar wind is paramount in shaping the transmission spec-troscopy of atmospheric escape, as seen in Sections 3 and 4. Our 3D self-consistent model is simultaneously balancing pressure from the encounter of cold planetary material and the hot and tenuous stellar wind, with a chemical network highly dependent on temperature and density of species. We now briefly outline the results of the previous two sections. Firstly, we address how the stellar wind impacts the helium popu-lation. We focus on models S0.1 , S40 and S200 , as these only vary the stellar wind profile. As stellar winds induce compression to the volume of planetary material, PdV work triggers temperature gradi-ents. At the same time, photons become subject to different optical depths, which consequently impacts heating and photoionization. Consequently, different temperature profiles introduce specific He-population networks, affecting the fraction of He (23 𝑆 ) to total He. When stellar winds shock at considerable large distances from the planet, like the extended outflow of case S0.1 , we find a mainly cold (𝑇 ≲ 10 4K) outflow due to a large column density of neutral species and dominant planetary ram pressure. The triplet’s net rate is mainly dictated by recombination of He + to He (23 𝑆 ) (𝛼 B [He (23 𝑆 )] ) and the collisional de-excitation of He (23 𝑆 ) to the intermediate state of He (21 𝑆 ) (𝜉 [He (21 𝑆 )] ). S40 and S200 models follow similar hier-archy of rates, although these rates may change within one order of magnitude as the stellar wind strength increases. When the flow-flow boundary is at a sub-sonic distance, the gas subject to advection ex-periences smaller optical depths and higher temperatures, alongside higher electron number density. This results in a comet-like outflow mainly composed of ionized He particles - as the singlet is likely to be photoionized, and the triplet is scarce due to a lack of cold He +.So, hot and ionized stellar winds (i.e., winds of He ++ and H +) con-tribute to enhance the amount of He +, which leads the enhancement of triplet species once the gas has cooled down sufficiently. Secondly, the effects of different stellar XUV fluxes are clearly seen when we compare models S40 and S40F , where the stellar wind profile is the same. The model with a younger star ( S40F ) reveals photoionization to be the leading sink of triplet after 𝑟 ≳ 2.5 𝑅 𝑝 ,keeping its balance with recombination as the main source rate. We also note a rise in volumetric heating rates, dominated by photoion-ization and with negligible influence from recombination photons, when compared to S40 . This boosts the mass-loss rate, allowing the volume of outflowing gas to grow and reach pressure balance at further distances. Therefore, an increase in the XUV environment makes the planetary gas hotter and more ionized at closer distances. We also see in model S40F a comparable lack of helium triplet, due to mid-UV photoionization. For pre-transit times (before T1), models S0.1 and S40F show a redshifted signal, originated by the extended photoevaporated mate-rial. Due to its flux-enhanced outflow, the spectra of case S40F is thermally more broadened, but experiences a smaller column den-sity. This is expressed in the strong redshift feature above 𝜆 = 10830 

Å, when comparing mid-transit spectra of S0.1 with S40F (Figure 8). When the planetary outflow is mainly shaped into a comet-like tail by the stellar wind - models S40 and S200 - we expect spec-tra with smaller equivalent widths. This is a consequence of small line-of-sight velocities with narrow column densities of triplet. As such, we see in the spectra of S40 (bottom left plot in Figure 8) that the summed contribution of Doppler and thermal broadening at 

𝜆 2,3 lines give rise to an egress spectra (T4) with a blueshift towards 

𝜆 1. On the other hand, S200 only sees obscuration centered around each line. There is also a very shallow but relatively strong blueshift component (bellow 𝜆 = 10829 Å) after egress, mainly due to hot and strongly advected gas further down in the tail. In summary, broadening behaviors will be expressed differently through these 𝜆 1,2,3 wavelengths, contributing to specific traits in the final line spectra. An increase in mass-loss rate of the stellar host modifies the overall He (23 𝑆 ) state by converging to a hotter and less populated outflow, which consequently gives rise to shallower and smaller spectra. When comparing models S40 and S40F , we are also able to extrapolate that the XUV environment is key to contrast with stellar winds: stronger photoionization increases the outflow’s mass-loss but also rarefies the triplet state. The impact of varying metallicity, stellar flux, planetary outflow, etc. (see Wang & Dai 2021a,b) raises the degrees of freedom when trying to understand observations with 3D models. We note that all models presented here only account for a planet with a fixed large ratio of He to H, and yet, model S200 expresses a 0.8% excess absorption for a very strong stellar wind interaction. Thus, lower values of [He /H] 𝑝 and harsh environments - either with strong stellar winds or high mid-UV and X-ray stellar flux - may be a plausible explanation for non-detections. 

5.2 Model Limitations and Future Improvements 

The underlying goal of this work is to present a new 3D HD model that contains a self-consistent population-chemistry scheme of atomic hy-drogen and helium, and interpret the impact of stellar winds and XUV fluxes. However, the separate simulations presented are relatively computationally expensive: under ‘Steady State’ evolution, models 

S0.1 , S40 and S200 take around 48h to 72h of computing time with 240 processors, or up to 9 days for the case of S40F . For 2 minutes in ‘Time Accurate’, it took each model around 32h with the same processing power. Also, the helium triplet seemed sensitive to grid resolution changes when using ‘Steady State’ evolution, sometimes accumulating in boundaries of higher resolution adjacent to cells of lower resolution. Using ‘Time Accurate’, we were able to improve these grid artifacts, although in model S0.1 , we still see the shadow of the grid in the helium triplet net rates, seen as the discontinuous rectangular shape, with edges at 𝑦 = ±7.5𝑅 𝑝 , seen in Figure C5. Note that only two possible paths populate this species, compared to 6 sinking rates, while having values much smaller than most other species. The density profile of He (23 𝑆 ) is the smallest for most of the grid and evolves through rates related to the amount of He + or He (11 𝑆 ), present at much higher densities. Typical timescales of the strongest rates ( ∼ 10 2 s−1) translate to about 1.2×10 4 recombinations for a 2 minute evolution. Here, we do not explicitly include the helium states 21 𝑆 or 21 𝑃 , as done in Allan et al. (2023); Schulik & Owen (2025), meaning that we assume an immediate transition rate of triplet to singlet, as done in other works in the literature (e.g., Oklopčić & Hirata 2018; Lampón et al. 2020; Dos Santos et al. 2022). Additionally, we also lack molecular elements such as H 2 or HeH +,which could impact the regions of subsonic outflow with additional cooling contributions (García Muñoz 2025; Taylor et al. 2026). This is a clear setback when compared with 1D models, which are able to have higher resolution throughout the grid, add more chemical complexity or even use multi-fluids instead of multi-species in a single fluid. For example, the work of Xing et al. (2023) is suggestive towards mass fractionation that can happen for low He to H ratio values - potentially explaining observations, also discussed in Schulik & Owen (2025). Despite the fact that this cannot be retrieved by our  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 15 

model, from their outputs it is possible to state that our model is realistically viable when assuming large ratios of He compared to H. Albeit several works have shown that collisional excitation and de-excitation of the metastable state He (23 𝑆 ) are meaningful sinks for the population of this species, photoionization is also important. The cross-section coefficients used here are derived from fits to pre-vious theoretical computations. The work of Taylor et al. (2025) overcomes low-resolution coefficients by adopting a method that computes high-resolution cross-section coefficients that are energy dependent. As the authors of the latter study commented, this allows for the appearance of artifacts such as resonances at wavelengths ranges overlapping with stellar coronal emission lines. Thus, higher resolution in photoionization cross-sections can be relevant in a con-text of resolved stellar spectra (see, e.g., the impact of the stellar host on HeI transits in Allan et al. 2025). However, this is less relevant for our models, as we use 4 channels of wavelength for the stellar spectra. This simplification, nevertheless, allows us to identify the leading heating sources. Finally, the presence of magnetic fields - not included here - can alter the atmospheric escape of the exoplanet, as well as the transmis-sion spectra in hydrogen transits (Carolan et al. 2021b; Khodachenko et al. 2021). Depending on the geometry of the magnetic field, a frac-tion of magnetic field lines will be open (Adams 2011). It will be through these open lines that ionized material escapes, while on the other hand, a dead-zone is formed around the planet by closed field lines. Given that in our currently built model, we have two additional ionized species (He + and He ++ ) that affect the triplet population, the overall column density of triplet should be modified by a new flow behavior. This will be investigated in a future work. Several studies have also shown that there is an impact in the mass-loss rate of the hydrodynamic escape (Owen & Adams 2014; Carolan et al. 2021b) when in a magnetized scenario. The work of Presa et al. (2024) brings additional insight to the importance of magnetic fields: the planetary magnetic obliquity were shown to impact the overall geometry of the outflow, and the Alfvenic regime in which the exoplanet exists is of relevance for the bulk escape. 

6 CONCLUSION 

In this paper, we developed a 3D HD model that incorporates the effect of radiation in heating and cooling processes while self-consistently solving for population balance of atomic species: hy-drogen (H 0; H +) and He (singlet: He (11 𝑆 ); triplet: He (23 𝑆 ); singly ionized: He +; doubly ionized: He ++ ). We have conducted two sets of models, each set with a different stellar host but maintaining the same exoplanet - a tidally locked Hot Jupiter located at 𝑎 = 0.05 au - with the goal of exploring the impact of stellar winds and XUV flux on the He I line. The first set of models have a moderate XUV spectra and the exoplanet is subject to stellar winds of different mass-loss rates, while the second set assumes a younger star, with much higher XUV fluxes, embedded in a wind that has a mass-loss rate that is 10 times larger than the solar wind. From the hydrodynamic outputs of each simulation, we are able to evaluate the significant impact that stellar winds have on the morphology of the outflow and specially, the influence on chemistry relevant to the He species. This study revealed that the population of triplet is affected by stellar winds, with a decrease of helium triplet density with increasing stellar wind strength. For a weak stellar wind ( 1/40 × solar), the relative fraction of triplet at the core of the escaping atmosphere can be 𝑛 He (23 𝑆 ) /𝑛 He ∼ 1×10 −5, while in a scenario of strong stellar wind (50 × solar) we found 𝑛 He (23 𝑆 ) /𝑛 He ∼ 8 × 10 −7. This is because, as a strong stellar wind confines more the extension of the atmosphere, the optical depth for ionizing stellar photons is reduced and planetary material gets hotter, reducing the population of neutral and triplet helium. On the other hand, with a constant stellar wind mass-loss rate, but increasing the XUV flux, we showed that the escape rate of the outflowing material increases, as expected, along with an increase in helium absorption. In the end, the stellar wind strength impacts the mass-loss rate of the planet and uniquely affects the chemistry network at hand. We also showed that advection plays an important role in the triplet population, for example, in the nightside, as it brings He + from elsewhere to this region. For the triplet population, we found that neglecting advection leads to an over-estimation of triplet closer to the planet ( ≲ 2 𝑅 𝑝 ), and an under-estimation beyond 

≳ 2 𝑅 𝑝 (Appendix D.) Additionally, we used a ray tracing model to compute the excess absorption of the transit of the exoplanet for the HeI line. The distinct geometry of the interaction with stellar winds and the column density of the triplet species resulted in different excess absorption profiles that show quite distinct features over the transit duration. Models with material orbiting ahead of the planet show pre-transit signal, and there is always non-negligible post-transit signal, because of a trailing comet-like tail. During transit, according to each model, we can have blue and redshift features broadened by thermal motions and line-of-sight velocities from the wind-wind interaction. A clear distinction is the model of strongest stellar wind, where excess absorption is less than 1% and the three lines do not blend in wavelengths between them. Potentially, for lower ratios of He /H, such winds may present as a valid cause to justify non-detections. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We thank the reviewer for their valuable comments and suggestions, which helped improve our paper. The authors thank Dr Andrew Allan for his suggestions and discussions over the course of this work. This publication is part of the project "Blowing in the wind: exoplane-tary atmospheres being carried away by stellar winds" (with project number VI.C.232.041 of the research programme "NWO Talent Pro-gramme VICI 2023"), which is financed by the Dutch Research Council (NWO). AAV acknowledges funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement no. 817540, ASTROFLOW). This work used the Dutch national e-infrastructure with the support of the SURF Cooperative using grants nos. EINF-7488 and EINF-13632. This work used the BATS-R-US tools devel-oped at the University of Michigan Center for Space Environment Modeling and made available through the NASA Community Coor-dinated Modeling Center. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

The data used in this article will be shared on reasonable request to the corresponding author. Animations of the performed simulations can be found in the following Zenodo link. 

REFERENCES  

> Adams F. C., 2011, ApJ, 730, 27 Alam M. K., et al., 2024, AJ, 168, 102 Allan A., Vidotto A. A., 2019, MNRAS, 490, 3760 MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# 16 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

Allan A. P., Vidotto A. A., 2025, MNRAS, 539, 2144 Allan A. P., Vidotto A. A., Villarreal D’Angelo C., Dos Santos L. A., Driessen F. A., 2023, MNRAS, 527, 4657 Allan A. P., Vidotto A. A., Sanz-Forcada J., Villarreal D’Angelo C., 2025, MNRAS, 545, staf1855 Allart R., et al., 2018, Science, 362, 1384 Allart R., et al., 2019, A&A, 623, A58 Allart R., et al., 2023, A&A, 677, A164 Allart R., et al., 2025a, Nature Communications, 16, 10822 Allart R., et al., 2025b, A&A, 700, A7 Alonso-Floriano F. J., et al., 2019, A&A, 629, A110 Behr P. R., et al., 2026, AJ, 171, 261 Ben-Jaffel L., Ballester G. E., 2013, A&A, 553, A52 Benjamin R. A., Skillman E. D., Smits D. P., 1999, ApJ, 514, 307 Biassoni F., Caldiroli A., Gallo E., Haardt F., Spinelli R., Borsa F., 2024, A&A, 682, A115 Black J. H., 1981, MNRAS, 197, 553 Bray I., Burgess A., Fursa D. V., Tully J. A., 2000, A&AS, 146, 481 Caldiroli A., Haardt F., Gallo E., Spinelli R., Malsky I., Rauscher E., 2021, A&A, 655, A30 Carolan S., Vidotto A. A., Villarreal D’Angelo C., Hazra G., 2021a, MNRAS, 500, 3382 Carolan S., Vidotto A. A., Hazra G., Villarreal D’Angelo C., Kubyshkina D., 2021b, MNRAS, 508, 6001 Carroll-Nellenback J., Frank A., Liu B., Quillen A. C., Blackman E. G., Dobbs-Dixon I., 2017, MNRAS, 466, 2458 Cen R., 1992, ApJS, 78, 341 Czesla, S. et al., 2024, A&A, 692, A230 Dong C., Jin M., Lingam M., Airapetian V. S., Ma Y., van der Holst B., 2018, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115, 260 Dos Santos L. A., 2021, Proceedings of the International Astronomical Union, 17, 56–71 Dos Santos L. A., et al., 2020, A&A, 634, L4 Dos Santos L. A., et al., 2022, A&A, 659, A62 Drake G. W., 1971, Phys. Rev. A, 3, 908 Fossati L., et al., 2017, A&A, 598, A90 Fossati L., et al., 2022, A&A, 658, A136 Fossati L., Pillitteri I., Shaikhislamov I. F., Bonfanti A., Borsa F., Carleo I., Guilluy G., Rumenskikh M. S., 2023, A&A, 673, A37 France K., et al., 2016, ApJ, 820, 89 Fulton B. J., et al., 2017, AJ, 154, 109 García Muñoz A., 2025, A&A, 698, A199 Guilluy G., et al., 2020, A&A, 639, A49 Guilluy G., et al., 2024, A&A, 686, A83 Gully-Santiago M., et al., 2024, AJ, 167, 142 Hazra G., Vidotto A. A., Carolan S., Villarreal D’Angelo C., Manchester W., 2021, MNRAS, 509, 5858 Hui L., Gnedin N. Y., 1997, MNRAS, 292, 27 Jensen A. G., Redfield S., Endl M., Cochran W. D., Koesterke L., Barman T., 2012, ApJ, 751, 86 Kasper J. C., Stevens M. L., Lazarus A. J., Steinberg J. T., Ogilvie K. W., 2007, ApJ, 660, 901 Kasper D., Bean J. L., Oklopčić A., Malsky I., Kempton E. M.-R., Désert J.-M., Rogers L. A., Mansfield M., 2020, AJ, 160, 258 Khodachenko M. L., Shaikhislamov I. F., Lammer H., Miroshnichenko I. B., Rumenskikh M. S., Berezutsky A. G., Fossati L., 2021, MNRAS, 507, 3626 Kirk J., Alam M. K., López-Morales M., Zeng L., 2020, AJ, 159, 115 Koskinen T. T., Harris M. J., Yelle R. V., Lavvas P., 2013, Icarus, 226, 1678 Kramida A., Ralchenko Y., Reader J., NIST ASD Team 2024, NIST Atomic Spectra Database (version 5.12), doi:https://doi.org/10.18434/T4W30F, 

https://physics.nist.gov/asd 

Krishnamurthy V., Cowan N. B., 2024, AJ, 168, 30 Krishnamurthy V., et al., 2021, AJ, 162, 82 Krolikowski D. M., Kraus A. L., Tofflemire B. M., Morley C. V., Mann A. W., Vanderburg A., 2024, AJ, 167, 79 Kubyshkina D., 2023, in Vidotto A. A., Fossati L., Vink J. S., eds, IAU Symposium Vol. 370, Winds of Stars and Exoplanets. pp 103–121, doi:10.1017/S1743921322004598 Kubyshkina D., et al., 2018, A&A, 619, A151 Kubyshkina D., Vidotto A. A., Villarreal D’Angelo C., Carolan S., Hazra G., Carleo I., 2022, MNRAS, 510, 2111 Lammer H., Selsis F., Ribas I., Guinan E. F., Bauer S. J., Weiss W. W., 2003, ApJ, 598, L121 Lampón M., et al., 2020, A&A, 636, A13 Lecavelier Des Etangs A., et al., 2010, A&A, 514, A72 Lecavelier des Etangs A., et al., 2012, A&A, 543, L4 Lingam M., Loeb A., 2018, International Journal of Astrobiology, 17, 116–126 Linsky J. L., France K., Ayres T., 2013, ApJ, 766, 69 Lopez E. D., Fortney J. J., Miller N., 2012, ApJ, 761, 59 MacLeod M., Oklopčić A., 2022, ApJ, 926, 226 MacLeod M., Oklopčić A., Nail F., Linssen D., 2025, ApJ, 988, 63 Matsakos T., Uribe A., Königl A., 2015, A&A, 578, A6 Mazeh T., Holczer T., Faigler S., 2016, A&A, 589, A75 Murray-Clay R. A., Chiang E. I., Murray N., 2009, ApJ, 693, 23 Nail F., Oklopčić A., MacLeod M., 2024, A&A, 684, A20 Nail F., Oklopčić A., MacLeod M., Baka K., Czesla S., Nagel E., Linssen D., Matthijsse J., 2025, A&A, 702, A238 Nortmann L., et al., 2018, Science, 362, 1388 Oklopčić A., Hirata C. M., 2018, ApJ, 855, L11 Orell-Miquel J., et al., 2024, A&A, 689, A179 Osterbrock D., Ferland G., 2006, The Astrophysics of Gaseous Nebulae and Active Galactic Nuclei. Astrophysics of gaseous nebulae and active galac-tic nuclei, 2nd. ed. by D.E. Osterbrock and G.J. Ferland. Sausalito, CA: University Science Books, 2006, doi:10.1007/978-94-009-0963-2 Owen J. E., Adams F. C., 2014, MNRAS, 444, 3761 Owen J. E., Wu Y., 2013, ApJ, 775, 105 Parker E., 1965, Space Science Reviews, 4, 666 Presa A., Driessen F. A., Vidotto A. A., 2024, MNRAS, 534, 3622 Saidel M., et al., 2026, AJ, 171, 257 Sanz-Forcada J., et al., 2025, A&A, 693, A285 Schulik M., Owen J. E., 2025, MNRAS, 542, 927 Seager S., Sasselov D. D., 2000, ApJ, 537, 916 Shaikhislamov I. F., Khodachenko M. L., Lammer H., Berezutsky A. G., Miroshnichenko I. B., Rumenskikh M. S., 2020, MNRAS Spake J. J., et al., 2018, Nature, 557, 68 Spake J. J., Oklopčić A., Hillenbrand L. A., 2021, AJ, 162, 284 Storey P. J., Hummer D. G., 1995, MNRAS, 272, 41 Taylor A. R., Koskinen T. T., Argenti L., Lewis N., Huang C., Arfaux A., Lavvas P., 2025, ApJ, 989, 68 Taylor A. R., Koskinen T. T., Huang C., Arfaux A., Lavvas P., 2026, ApJ, 999, 214 Tyler D., Petigura E. A., Oklopčić A., David T. J., 2024, ApJ, 960, 123 Tóth G., et al., 2005, Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics, 110 Vauclair S., Laymand M., Bouchy F., Vauclair G., Hui Bon Hoa A., Charpinet S., Bazot M., 2008, A&A, 482, L5 Verner D. A., Ferland G. J., Korista K. T., Yakovlev D. G., 1996, ApJ, 465, 487 Vidal-Madjar A., Lecavelier des Etangs A., Désert J.-M., Ballester G. E., Ferlet R., Hébrard G., Mayor M., 2003, Nature, 422, 143 Vidotto A. A., 2025, ARA&A, 63, 299 Vidotto A. A., Cleary A., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 2417 Vissapragada S., et al., 2022, AJ, 164, 234 Wang L., Dai F., 2018, ApJ, 860, 175 Wang L., Dai F., 2021a, ApJ, 914, 98 Wang L., Dai F., 2021b, ApJ, 914, 99 Watson A. J., Donahue T. M., Walker J. C. G., 1981, Icarus, 48, 150 Xing L., Yan D., Guo J., 2023, ApJ, 953, 166 Yan D., Seon K.-i., Guo J., Chen G., Li L., 2022, ApJ, 936, 177 Zhang M., et al., 2022, AJ, 163, 68 Zhang Z., et al., 2023, Science Advances, 9, eadf8736 MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 17 

APPENDIX A: TABLES WITH RELEVANT REACTIONS 

Tables A1 and A2 provide the expression for the (de)populating rates and volumetric cooling rates used in our model. Note that many of the reaction rates present in Table A1 should have temperature distinction between electron, ion or fluid temperatures. Due to the nature of our single-fluid model, we can only retrieve a fluid averaged temperature. 

APPENDIX B: NUMERICAL METHODS 

The treatment of the exponential of optical depths (Equation (12)) is done through the use of a normalization value. Note that the advan-tage of performing this treatment is that we only need to compute a total of 4 different integrations - one for each species - instead of an integration for each species at each channel. Assuming a typical cross-section base value of 𝜎 0 = 10 −18 barn, we computed as follows: 

exp (− 𝜏 𝜆 ) = exp −∑︁ 

> sp

𝜏 𝜆 [sp ]

!

=

Ö

> sp

exp 



−

∫ final 𝑥  

> start 𝑥

𝑛 sp 𝜎 sp ,𝜆 𝑑𝑥 



=

Ö

> sp

exp 



− 𝜎 sp ,𝜆 

𝜎 0

∫ final 𝑥  

> start 𝑥

𝜎 0𝑛 sp 𝑑𝑥 



==

Ö

> sp



exp 



−

∫ final 𝑥  

> start 𝑥

𝜎 0𝑛 sp 𝑑𝑥 

  𝜎 sp ,𝜆 𝜎 0

> 

APPENDIX C: ADDITIONAL FIGURES 

Figure C1 displays the important components of the energy equa-tion: total volumetric heating rate (top), total volumetric cooling rate (middle) and PdV work (bottom panels). Figures C2, C3 and C4 display all the rates present in the triplet schematics for the cases S40 , S200 , and S40F respectively. Figure C5 shows the normalized net rate for the triplet in the 

𝑥𝑦 plane for models S0.1 , S40 , S200 and S40F , and Figure C6 provides the entire population net-rate along the star-planet direction for model S0.1 , where the triplet net rate is seen as a red line. From these figures, we can explore two distinct features: an overall smooth net-rate profile for most species, and some granulated fluctuations in R [ He (23 𝑆 )] , mostly pronounced in S0.1 . Overall, the triplet net rate is positive close to the planet and mostly negative inside the expanding atmosphere. For example, at 𝑟 > 7.5 𝑅 𝑝 , there takes place a switch between the leading sink rate for triplet 𝜉 [He (21 𝑆 )] to 

Φ[He (23 𝑆 )] . The region of flow-flow interaction for S0.1 , S40 and 

S200 also shows net positive rates (i.e., local increase of the fraction of triplet there). The hot temperatures and ionized environment of the stellar wind enhances the collisional excitation rate of singlet to triplet at these boundaries. Although models S40 and S200 share similar bulk geometries, notice the growth in negative net rate volume for the material close to the planet for the strongest stellar wind model 

S200 . We address the grid sensitivity in Section 5.2, although we emphasize that the absolute value of the net rate, |R [ He (23 𝑆 )]| ,remains smooth, with only appreciable discontinuities at shocks and grid resolution change. 

APPENDIX D: TESTING THE IMPORTANCE OF ADVECTION 

Our methodology to compute the triplet population is self-consistent, that is, the triplet density is computed at every iteration and is coupled to the density, temperature, optical depth, and velocity derived in the models. However, this approach can become time consuming and computationally expensive. One solution to reduce the computation costs is to compute instead the triplet density in a post-processing fashion, i.e., the 3D models still solve for the outflow of the planet (velocity, density, temperature), but the helium population balance is not computed together with the hydrodynamical model, and instead is found a posteriori . This is for example, what has been studied in the works of MacLeod & Oklopčić (2022), which in addition, also neglects the advection term. As we showed in our study, advection plays an important role in the triplet population, for example, in the nightside, as it brings He + from elsewhere to this region. Here, we study the effects of neglecting the advection terms and of computing the triplet population fraction ( 𝑓 He (3) = 𝑛 He (23 𝑆 ) /𝑛 He ) in a post-processing step. For that, we present two methods: 

• Method 1: finds 𝑓 He (3) post-processed without assuming advec-tion. 

• Method 2: finds 𝑓 He (3) post-processed without assuming advec-tion and assuming a constant Temperature throughout the grid. We show the result of this investigation in Figure D1, where we compare our self-consistent singlet and triplet density pro-files from model S0.1 and the ones derived using the alterna-tive post-processing methods. Overall, neglecting advection (regard-less of the method) leads to an over-population of singlet helium 

𝑓 He (1) = 𝑛 He (11 𝑆 ) /𝑛 He ≈ 1.0. For the triplet population, we found that closer to the planet ( ≲ 2 𝑅 𝑝 ), the triplet is over-estimated in models neglecting advection, and under-estimated beyond ≳ 2 𝑅 𝑝 . 

> This paper has been typeset from a TEX/L ATEX file prepared by the author. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)

# 18 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

Table A1. The rates of populating and depopulating processes for the hydrogen and helium states considered in our model. 

Refs. Populated Species Depopulated Species Rates (g cm −3 s−1)

Recombination 𝛼 

a, b H0 H+ 𝛼 B [H0 ] = 2.59 × 10 −13  𝑇 

> 10 4

 −0.7

ne 𝜌 H+

c He(1 1S) He + 𝛼 B [He (11 𝑆 ) ] = 6.23 × 10 −14  𝑇 

> 10 4

 −0.827 

ne 𝜌 He +

c He(1 1S) He + 𝛼 A-B [He(1 1S)] = 1.54 × 10 −13  𝑇 

> 10 4

 −0.486 

ne 𝜌 He +

(emits 24.59 eV photon) c He(2 3S) He + 𝛼 B [He(2 3S)] = 2.10 × 10 −13  𝑇 

> 10 4

 −0.778 

ne 𝜌 He +

d, e He + He ++ 𝛼 B [He +] = 5.506 × 10 −14  1263030 

> 𝑇

1.5 

1 +

 460960 

> 𝑇

0.407 1.5

ne 𝜌 He ++ 

Collisional ionization 𝚿 

f, g H+ H0 Ψ [H 0] = 1.27 × 10 −21 √𝑇 exp [− 157809 .1 

> 𝑇

] ne 𝜌 H0

   EH0



f, g He + He( 11S) Ψ [He( 11S)] = 9.38 × 10 −22 √𝑇 exp [− 285335 .4 

> 𝑇

] ne 𝜌 He (11S)

 

EHe (11S)



f, g He + H( 23S) Ψ [He( 23S)] = 6.41 × 10 −21 √𝑇 exp [− 55338  

> 𝑇

] ne 𝜌 He (23S)

 

EHe (23S)



f, g He ++ He + Ψ [He +] = 4.95 × 10 −22 √𝑇 exp [− 631515  

> 𝑇

] ne 𝜌 He +

 (EHe + )

Collisional de-excitation 𝚵 

h, i He(1 1S) He(2 3S) Ξ [He(1 1S)] = 5.0 × 10 −10 nH0 𝜌 He (23S)

(by means of a H 0)e, h, i, j He(2 3S) He(1 1S) Ξ [He(2 3S)] = 2.10 × 10 −8√︃ 13 .6 

> kB𝑇

exp 



− 19 .81 

> kB𝑇



Υ13 ne 𝜌 He (11S)

(by means of a e − )

21 𝑆 and 21 𝑃 states Collisional de-excitation 𝜉 

e, i, j He(2 1S) He(2 3S) 𝜉 [He(2 1S)] = 2.10 × 10 −8√︃ 13 .6 

> kB𝑇

exp 



− 0.80 

> kB𝑇



Υ31 𝐴 ne 𝜌 He (23S)

(by means of a e − )e, i, j He(2 1P) He(2 3S) 𝜉 [He(2 1P)] = 2.10 × 10 −8√︃ 13 .6 

> kB𝑇

exp 



− 1.40 

> kB𝑇



Υ31 𝐵 ne 𝜌 He (23S)

(by means of a e − )

Charge exchange 𝜒 

h, k H+, He(1 1S) H0, He + 𝜒 [He(1 1S)] = 1.25 × 10 −15  𝑇 

> 300

0.25 

𝑚 H nH0 nHe +

h, k H0, He + H+, He(1 1S) 𝜒 [He +] = 1.75 × 10 −11  𝑇 

> 300

 −0.75 

exp [− 128000  

> 𝑇

] 𝑚 H 𝑛 H+ 𝑛 He (11S)

Radiative Decay 𝜑 

l He(1 1S) He(2 3S) 𝜑 [He(1 1S)] = 1.272 × 10 −4 𝜌 He (23S)

Notes: References: References: a – Storey & Hummer (1995), b – Osterbrock & Ferland (2006), c – Benjamin et al. (1999), d – Hui & Gnedin (1997), e – Caldiroli et al. (2021), f – Black (1981), g – Cen (1992), h – Bray et al. (2000), i – Oklopčić & Hirata (2018), j – Lampón et al. (2020), k – Koskinen et al. (2013), l – Drake (1971). We emphasize that the behavior of Υ𝑖 𝑗 is temperature dependent and is fitted by Caldiroli et al. (2021) - presented explicitly in GitHub: Link. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 19 

Table A2. Cooling processes included in our model in terms of volumetric cooling rate. The sum of the cooling rates ( C) is included in Equation (3). Number densities are given in cm −3 and temperatures in K. 

References Volumetric cooling rates (erg cm −3 s−1)

Collisional ionization cooling 

a,b 1.27 × 10 −21 √𝑇 exp [− 157809 .1 

> 𝑇

] ne 𝑛 H0

a,b 9.38 × 10 −22 √𝑇 exp [− 285335 .4 

> 𝑇

] ne 𝑛 He (11S)

a,b 6.41 × 10 −21 √𝑇 exp [− 55338  

> 𝑇

] ne 𝑛 He (23S)

a,b 4.95 × 10 −22 √𝑇 exp [− 631515  

> 𝑇

] ne 𝑛 He +

Recombination cooling 

b 8.70 × 10 −27 √𝑇 

 𝑇 

> 10 3

 −0.2

ne 𝑛 H+

a,b 1.55 × 10 −26 𝑇 0.3647 ne 𝑛 He +

a,b 3.48 × 10 −26 √𝑇 

 𝑇 

> 10 3

 −0.2

ne 𝑛 He ++ 

Dielectronic recombination cooling 

a,b 1.24 × 10 −13 𝑇 −1.5 exp [− 470000  

> 𝑇

]



1 + 0.3 exp [− 94000  

> 𝑇

]



ne 𝑛 He +

Collisional excitation cooling 

a,b,c,d 7.5 × 10 −19 exp [− 118348  

> 𝑇

] ne 𝑛 H0

a,b 5.54 × 10 −17 𝑇 −0.397 exp [− 473638  

> 𝑇

] ne 𝑛 He +

a,b 1.16 × 10 −20 √𝑇 exp [− 13179  

> 𝑇

] ne 𝑛 He (23S)

Free-free emission (Bremsstrahlung) 

a,b 1.42 × 10 −27 √𝑇 

 32



ne [𝑛 H+ + 𝑛 He + + 4𝑛 He ++ ]

Notes: References: a – Black (1981), b – Cen (1992), c – Murray-Clay et al. (2009), d – Allan & Vidotto (2019). MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) 20 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

Figure C1. 2D view in the orbital plane 𝑧 = 0 of the total volumetric heating ( H) and cooling ( C) rates, and PdV work in the top, middle and bottom row of panels, respectively. Each column corresponds to a different model. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 21 

Figure C2. 2D view in the orbital plane 𝑧 = 0 of all contributing reactions rates to the population of He triplet for the model S40 , centered on the planet. Top and middle rows: annihilating rates. Bottom row: populating rates. The net rate can be found as the upper right plot in Figure C5. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) 22 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

Figure C3. 2D view in the orbital plane 𝑧 = 0 of all contributing reactions rates to the population of He triplet for the model S200 , centered on the planet. Top and middle rows: annihilating rates. Bottom row: populating rates. The net rate can be found as the lower left plot in Figure C5. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 23 

Figure C4. 2D view in the orbital plane 𝑧 = 0 of all contributing reactions rates to the population of He triplet for the model S40F , centered on the planet. Top and middle rows: annihilating rates. Bottom row: populating rates. The net rate can be found as the lower right plot in Figure C5. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) 24 A. Falorca and A. Vidotto 

Figure C5. 2D view in the orbital plane 𝑧 = 0 of the net contribution from all reactions rates relative to the population of He triplet divided by the local fluid density. Models are identified at the top right corner. We make use of a colorbar that is logarithmic and symmetric, with black representing a null rate. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026) A Self-Consistent 3D Hydrodynamic Model for Helium Transit Signatures in Evaporating Hot Jupiters 25 

Figure C6. The species net rates for the case S0.1 . As before, the y-axis shows rates in s −1, obtained by dividing the mass volumetric rate by the total density of the fluid. Note that the variability in the net rate of the triplet species is imprinted in the relative fraction profile in Figure C5. 

Figure D1. Comparison between density of He singlet and triplet ( 𝑓 He (1) , 𝑓 He (3) respectively) from the outputs of model S0.1 (thick solid line) and post-processing methods without advection (Method 1, thin solid line) and without advection and constant temperature (Method 2, dashed and dotted lines). The dashed and dotted lines follow a scheme with constant temperature of 𝑇 = 1.4 × 10 4K and 𝑇 = 3.0 × 10 3K, respectively. MNRAS 000 , 1–17 (2026)