Title: Probing disk dynamics and dust evolution through shadows in protoplanetary disks: A case study of the HD 142527 disk

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.17648v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Jul 2026 01:53:31 GMT

Number of Pages: 25

Markdown Content:
Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan , 2026, 00 , 1–25 doi: 10.1093/pasj/xxx000 Advance access publication date: 

# Probing disk dynamics and dust evolution through shadows in protoplanetary disks: A case study of the HD 142527 disk 

Yuya F ukuhara ,1,∗,† Ryuta O rihara ,2,3 ,∗,† Satoshi O kuzumi ,2 and Takayuki M uto 4

> 1

Institute of Astronomy and Astrophysics, Academia Sinica, 11F of Astronomy-Mathematics Building, No.1, Sec. 4, Roosevelt Rd, Taipei 106319, Taiwan, R.O.C. 

> 2

Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Institute of Science Tokyo, Meguro, Tokyo 152-8551, Japan 

> 3

Department of Astronomy, Graduate School of Science, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan 

> 4

Division of Liberal Arts, Kogakuin University, Tokyo, Japan 

> †

These authors contributed equally to this work. 

> ∗

E-mail: yfukuhara@asiaa.sinica.edu.tw, orihara.r.2163@m.isct.ac.jp 

> ORCID: 0000-0002-9660-8947, 0000-0003-4039-8933, 0000-0002-1886-0880

Abstract 

Planet formation begins with dust growth and planetesimal formation within protoplanetary disks surrounding young stars. To understand these pro-cesses, it is essential to estimate dust grain sizes from disk observations. In this study, we develop a new method to constrain grain size based on the estimation of cooling timescales. Our approach applies to transitional disks that possess an inclined inner disk casting shadows on the outer disk, whose temperature variations serve as a tracer of dust properties. By constructing a three-dimensional model of the disk surface using near-infrared scattering light images and comparing it with submillimeter dust continuum maps, we estimate the spatial offset between the irradiated and shadowed regions to derive the cooling timescale. We then build an analytic model that calculates the cooling timescale at the dust thermal emission height with an assumed turbulent diffusion intensity to infer the dust surface density and dust grain size. Applying this method to the protoplanetary disk around HD 142527, we find that the disk’s northern shadowed region cools on a timescale of a few percent of the orbital period and that the maximum grain size consistent with the observations is approximately 0.1-1 mm. We also find that the conditions required for the vertical shear instability, which needs a short cooling timescale, are satisfied, allowing turbulence with an intensity consistent with near-infrared observations. This study demonstrates that estimating cooling timescales is an effective tool for constraining dust grain size. Our approach can be generally applied to other transition disks with inner-disk-induced shadows. 

Keywords: protoplanetary disks – methods: observational — methods: analytical 

1 Introduction 

Planet formation begins with the growth of micrometer-sized dust particles into kilometer-sized planetesimals within protoplanetary disks surrounding young stars (for a review, see Dr ˛ a˙ zkowska et al. 2023). This dust growth and subsequent planetesimal formation depend on gas turbulence and the spatial distribution of dust par-ticles. Gas turbulence induces relative velocities between dust grains (e.g., Ormel & Cuzzi 2007), leading to their fragmentation (e.g., Brauer et al. 2008; Birnstiel et al. 2012), while also gov-erning the spatial distribution of dust via turbulent di ff usion (e.g., Dubrulle et al. 1995). If dust grains concentrate toward the mid-plane due to low turbulence (e.g., Dullemond & Dominik 2005) or toward local maxima of gas pressure (e.g., Whipple 1972; Pinilla et al. 2012), streaming and gravitational instabilities can set in (e.g., Goldreich & Ward 1973; Youdin & Goodman 2005; Lim et al. 2025, 2026), triggering planetesimal formation. Throughout these stages, gas cooling plays a critical role in disk evolution and dust growth. Specifically, the cooling timescale and its spatial distribution control the onset of various (thermo-)hydrodynamic instabilities and the intensity of turbulence driven by them (for a review, see Lesur et al. 2023). For instance, a short cooling timescale (i.e., e ffi cient cooling) is required to sustain tur-bulence driven by the vertical shear instability (VSI; e.g., Urpin 2003; Nelson et al. 2013; Lin & Youdin 2015), which is a can-didate mechanism for determining dust spatial distribution in the outer disk regions (e.g., Pfeil et al. 2023; Fukuhara et al. 2025). Effi cient cooling also dictates the strength of turbulence driven by the gravitational instability (GI; e.g., Gammie 2001; Mejía et al. 2005; Shi & Chiang 2014), and spiral structures induced by GI de-pend on the cooling timescale (e.g., Cossins et al. 2009; Longarini et al. 2021; Baehr & Zhu 2021a; Su & Wei 2025; for reviews, see Kratter & Lodato 2016; Bae et al. 2023). In GI-dominated disks, effi cient cooling can prevent dust growth through strong di ff usion and high relative collision velocities of dust particles (e.g., Booth & Clarke 2016; Shi et al. 2016; Baehr & Zhu 2021b), while at the same time promoting disk fragmentation (e.g., Gammie 2001; Baehr & Klahr 2015; Takahashi et al. 2016; Leedham et al. 2025), which can lead to planet formation. Furthermore, local cooling influences the formation of substructures, such as gas gaps, spi-rals, and vortices, induced by embedded planets (e.g., Raettig et al. 2013; Les & Lin 2015). A moderate cooling timescale, which is comparable to the local dynamical timescale, can suppress spiral arms (e.g., Zhang & Zhu 2020), narrow and deepen planetary gaps (Miranda & Rafikov 2020a, 2020b; Bae et al. 2021; Zhang et al. 2024), and accelerate the decay of vortices (Tarczay-Nehéz et al. 2020; Rometsch et al. 2021; Fung & Ono 2021). Dust particles, in turn, can determine the cooling e ffi ciency of 

Received: , Accepted: 

© 2026. Astronomical Society of Japan. arXiv:2607.17648v1 [astro-ph.EP] 20 Jul 2026 2 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 

protoplanetary disks, since gas molecules are less e ffi cient radi-ators than dust (e.g., Malygin et al. 2017; Barranco et al. 2018). Consequently, the cooling timescale and its spatial distribution de-pend on the size, size distribution, and abundance of dust grains (e.g., Bae et al. 2021; Fukuhara et al. 2021). Therefore, one can ex-pect a strong coupling and coevolution between gas dynamics (tur-bulence /substructures) and dust properties via cooling processes. Given this importance, it is desirable to constrain the cooling timescale from observations of protoplanetary disks. A poten-tial candidate target for this purpose is a transition disk, charac-terized by a dust-depleted inner cavity. In these transition disks, light from a central star reaches the outer disk regions directly through the inner cavity, allowing the heating and cooling pro-cesses to be observed in a spatially resolved manner. Moreover, if there is a misaligned inner disk with respect to the outer disk, gas and dust in the outer disk would undergo repeated heating and cooling as they rotate into and out of the shadow cast by the in-ner disk. As disk material enters and exits the shadow, its tem-perature relaxes toward the local radiative equilibrium value on a timescale set by the cooling timescale, so the resulting tem-perature variation with orbital phase carries direct information on this timescale. Recent radio interferometric observations with the Atacama Large Millimeter–submillimeter Array (ALMA) have characterized properties of transition disks and identified compact dust disks within the inner cavities of several systems (e.g., van der Marel 2023). In some cases, these compact inner disks are mis-aligned with their outer disks, casting shadows across them. Such shadows have been observed in near-infrared scattered light in sev-eral systems (e.g., HD 142527; Marino et al. 2015, HD 100453; Benisty et al. 2017, HD 143006; Benisty et al. 2018, ZZ Tau IRS; Hashimoto et al. 2024). Various mechanisms have been proposed to explain this misalignment, including gravitational perturbations from planet–disk or binary–disk interactions (e.g., Owen & Lai 2017; Matsakos & Königl 2017; Facchini et al. 2018; Nealon et al. 2018; Zhu 2019), interaction with a misaligned stellar magnetic field (Bouvier et al. 1999), anisotropic accretion /infall of material onto the disk (Bate 2018; Ku ff meier et al. 2021), and tidal pertur-bation from a stellar flyby /encounter (Nealon et al. 2020). In this paper, we propose a novel method to estimate the local cooling timescale in transition disks with shadows cast by inclined inner disks and to use this cooling timescale to constrain the dust grain size. Specifically, we use near-infrared and submillimeter observations to estimate the cooling timescale of a disk, and then determine the dust grain size consistent with the estimated cooling timescale. By applying this approach to the protoplanetary disk around HD 142527, we infer dust evolution in this disk. This paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we describe the method for estimating the cooling timescale using the shadow induced by a misaligned inner disk and the analytic model for con-straining the dust grain size. We present the observation data for the disk around HD 142527 and parameter choices in section 3, to which we apply our methods. Section 4 presents the main results for estimating the cooling timescale and constraining dust grain size. In section 5, we examine the self-consistency of our model, assuming the vertical shear instability operates as the turbulence-driving mechanism. We discuss the implications and limitations of our study in section 6 and summarize our study in section 7. 

2 Method 

In this section, we describe our methodology for estimating the cooling timescale from multi-wavelength observations of the pro-toplanetary disk and for constraining the dust grain size using an analytic model (see figure 1 for an overview). Our approach relies on the spatial o ff set between shadow signatures observed at dif-ferent wavelengths. First, we construct a three-dimensional model of the outer disk’s scattering surface using near-infrared images, based on the method developed by Orihara & Momose (2025). We then compare the location of this shadowed region in this model with the azimuthal temperature profile derived from dust contin-uum observations. The resulting spatial o ff set between the irradi-ated and shadowed regions allows us to estimate the local cooling timescale. This o ff set arises because the disk temperature relaxes toward its irradiated or shadowed equilibrium value over a finite cooling timescale. Therefore, the location of maximum or mini-mum temperature lags the corresponding change in illumination. While our strategy shares similarities with that of Teague et al. (2022), our method utilizes near-infrared scattered light to trace the disk surface, rather than relying on molecular gas emission. Separately, we construct an analytic model that calculates the the-oretical cooling timescale at the dust thermal emission height for an assumed turbulent di ff usion intensity. By comparing this the-oretical cooling timescale with the observationally derived value, we infer the dust grain size. In the following subsections, we describe our methods step by step. For the analytic model described in section 2.1, we first pa-rameterize the dust grain size and its distribution (subsection 2.1.1) and estimate the disk temperature based on the observed dust con-tinuum intensity (subsection 2.1.2). Next, we determine the ver-tical density profiles for the gas and dust (subsection 2.1.3). By adopting specific dust opacities and porosities (subsection 2.1.4), we calculate the optical depth to estimate the emission height at a submillimeter wavelength (subsection 2.1.5). Finally, we compute the vertical profile of the cooling timescale to extract its theoretical value at this emission height (subsection 2.1.6). On the observational side described in section 2.2, we recon-struct the three-dimensional scattering surface and shadow geom-etry from infrared scattered-light images (subsection 2.2.2). By comparing this geometry with the azimuthal brightness tempera-ture profiles derived from submillimeter continuum maps, we mea-sure the spatial o ff sets between the irradiated and shadowed re-gions. These o ff sets allow us to derive the local cooling timescale within the shadowed regions (subsection 2.2.1). Finally, by com-paring the theoretically predicted cooling timescale at the dust thermal emission height with the observationally derived value, we constrain the dust grain size following the procedure described in section 2.3. 

2.1 Analytic model for the cooling timescale 

2.1.1 Dust size distribution models 

Following Fukuhara & Okuzumi (2024), we consider two di ff erent types of grain size distribution. The first model is the power-law model, where the grain size distribution is given by 

dN d(a)

da =



(12 + 3p)Σdust 

4πρ int 

a4+p 

> max

− a4+p

> min

 ap, amin < a < amax ,

0, otherwise ,

(1) where dN d(a)/da is the number surface density per unit particle size a, Σdust is the total dust mass surface density, ρint is the grains’ internal density, p (, −4) is the slope of the size distribution, and 

amin and amax are the minimum and maximum particle sizes, re-spectively. The dust surface density, the slope of the size distri-bution, and the minimum and maximum grain sizes serve as free Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 3T

ρgas (z)

d

da nd(z)

tcool (z)

amax 

tcool ,cal 

Iν,obs 

tcool ,est 

κd,ν(a)

αz = 2 × 10 −3

estimated cooling timescale 

cooling timescale 

at emission height 

cooling timescale 

vertical profile 

gas and dust 

vertical profiles 

disk temperature 

maximum grain size 

dust thermal emission intensity 

# Disk Observations 

dust opacity 

vertical diffusion coefficient 

other parameters 

minimum grain size 

gas surface density 

dust filling factor 

# Comparison 

dust thermal emission 

(submillimeter ) 

dust scattered light 

(infrared) 

scattering surface/ 

shadow geometry 

optically thick 

# Analytic Model 

temperature azimuthal profile 

check 

(section 5) 

T(ϕR)

Σgas 

amin 

input parameters 

dust surface density 

Σdust 

dNd

da ∝ ap

size distribution 

opacity model fdust 

zemi 

emission height 

Fig. 1. Schematic overview of our methodology for estimating the cooling timescale and constraining the dust grain size by combining multi-wavelength obser-vations with an analytic model. High-resolution dust thermal emission observations at submillimeter wavelengths provide the emission intensity and azimuthal temperature profile. From near-infrared scattered-light observations, we determine the scattering surface and shadow geometry using the method proposed by (Orihara & Momose 2025, subsection 2.2.2). By measuring the spatial offset between the azimuthal temperature variation and the shadow boundary, we derive the local cooling timescale (subsection 2.2.1). In our analytic model, we consider a protoplanetary disk composed of gas and dust. For a given dust grain size and size distribution (subsection 2.1.1), we compute the disk temperature using the observed thermal emission intensity and dust extinction opacity (subsection 2.1.2). This temperature determines the vertical gas density profile, which, in turn, dictates the vertical dust distribution for an assumed vertical diffusion coefficient (subsection 2.1.3). Using the adopted dust opacities (subsection 2.1.4), we calculate the optical depth to estimate the emission heights at a submillimeter wavelength and scattering surface height at a near-infrared wavelength (subsection 2.1.5). We then compute the vertical profile of the cooling timescale to extract its theoretical value at this emission height (subsection 2.1.6). Finally, we constrain the dust grain size by comparing the theoretically predicted cooling timescale at the emission height with the observationally derived one (subsection 2.3). Additionally, we use the vertical profile of the cooling timescale to verify the validity of the assumed vertical diffusion coefficient (section 5). The primary parameters in our model are the maximum grain size and dust surface density, while other parameters include the gas surface density, minimum grain size, size distribution power-law index, and dust filling factor (section 3.3). The top left and right panels display the ALMA Band 9 dust continuum emission and VLT/SPHERE scattered-light images of the disk around HD 142527, respectively. 

parameters in this study (see also section 3.3). Equation (1) satis-fies the normalization 

Σdust =

Z

md(a) dN d(a)

da da , (2) where md = (4 π/ 3) ρint a3 is the particle mass. The second model is the single-sized model where all dust par-ticles are assumed to have equal size a1. Formally, the size distri-bution for the single-sized model can be written as 

dN d(a)

da = 3Σdust 

4πρ int a31

δ(a − a1) (3) where δ is the delta function. When we adopt the single-sized model, we treat a1 as a free parameter. Equation (3) also fulfills equation (2). 

2.1.2 Disk temperature 

We estimate the disk temperature using the observed intensity of the dust thermal emission. Assuming a vertical isothermal disk, the intensity at a frequency ν can be expressed as (e.g., Carrasco-González et al. 2019; Sierra & Lizano 2020; Sierra et al. 2024) 4 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 

Iν, obs = Bν(T )

"

1 − exp − τall 

μ

!

+ ⟨ων⟩F(τall , ⟨ων⟩)

#

, (4) where T is the disk temperature, Bν(T ) is the Planck function, τall 

is the disk’s vertical extinction optical thickness, μ ≡ cos i is the cosine of the disk inclination i, ⟨ων⟩ is an averaged dust albedo de-fined in equation (18), and F(τall , ⟨ων⟩) is a function representing the e ff ect of dust scattering on the emergent intensity. Here, τall is defined by 

τall =

Z

md(a)κd,ν (a) dN d(a)

da da , (5) where κd,ν (a) is the opacity per dust mass at a frequency of ν. The averaged dust albedo ⟨ων⟩ depends on the size distribution and dust extinction opacity, which are described in subsection 2.1.4. The expression of F(τall , ⟨ων⟩) is given by 

F(τall , ⟨ων⟩) =

F1(τall , ⟨ων⟩) + F2(τall , ⟨ων⟩)exp h− √3 (1 − ⟨ ων⟩)τall 

i  √1 − ⟨ ων⟩ − 1 −  √1 − ⟨ ων⟩ + 1 ,

(6) where 

F1(τall , ⟨ων⟩) = 1 − exp h− √3 (1 − ⟨ ων⟩)τall − τall /μ i

√3 (1 − ⟨ ων⟩)μ + 1 (7) and 

F2(τall , ⟨ων⟩) = exp ( −τall /μ ) − exp h− √3 (1 − ⟨ ων⟩)τall 

i

√3 (1 − ⟨ ων⟩)μ − 1 . (8) For a given dust thermal emission intensity Iν, obs , dust grain size a,and dust size distribution dN d(a)/da , we estimate the disk temper-ature at each disk position, T , using equation (4). 

2.1.3 Gas and dust vertical distributions 

We adopt the cylindrical coordinate system ( R, z), where R and 

z are the distance from the central star and the height from the midplane. From vertical hydrostatic equilibrium, the gas density is given by 

ρgas = Σgas 

√2πHgas 

exp 

− z2

2H2gas 

, (9) where Σgas is the gas surface density and Hgas = cs/ΩK is the gas scale height with cs and ΩK being the isothermal sound speed and Keplerian frequency, respectively. The isothermal sound speed is given by cs = pkBT/mg, where kB is the Boltzmann constant and 

mg is the mean molecular mass of the gas. The Keplerian fre-quency is given by ΩK = pGM ∗/R3, where G is the gravitational constant and M∗ is the mass of the central star. We set mg = 2.3mp,where mp is the proton mass. In this study, Σgas serves as a free parameter. Assuming the balance between settling and di ff usion, the verti-cal distribution of the dust particles can be written as (Takeuchi & Lin 2002) 

dn d(a, z)

da = Cd(a) exp 

− z2

2H2gas 

− St mid (a)

αz

exp z2

2H2gas 

− 1

, (10) where dn d(a, z)/da is the particle number density per unit ra-dius at height z, St mid (a) is the Stokes number of the particles at the midplane, αz is a dimensionless parameter that character-izes the level of the dust vertical di ff usion caused by turbulence, and Cd(a) is the normalized constant determined by the condition 

dN d(a)/da = R (dn d(a, z)/da )dz . Because most dust particles lie at the region of z ≪ Hgas , the exponential factor in equation (10) can be approximated as exp[ −z2/(2 H2d )], yielding (Fukuhara et al. 2021) 

Cd(a) = 1

√2πHd(a, α z)

dN d(a)

da . (11) Here, Hd(a, α z) is the scale height of particles with size a given by (Dubrulle et al. 1995; Youdin & Lithwick 2007) 

Hd(a, α z) =

"

1 + St mid (a)

αz

#−1/2

Hgas . (12) The Stokes number is the product of the stopping time and Keplerian frequency. Assuming that the particle radius is smaller than the mean free path of the gas molecules, gas drag onto the particles follows Epstein’s law, which gives (see, e.g., Birnstiel et al. 2010) St mid (a) = πρ int a

2Σgas 

. (13) The vertical–size distribution dn d(a, z)/da gives the collisional heat transfer and opacity, which control the cooling timescale, as a function of z. The mean travel length of gas molecules colliding with dust particles ℓgd is given by 

ℓgd =

Z

πa2 dn d

da da 

!−1

. (14) This determines the timescale of collisional heat transfer [see equation (25) in subsection 2.1.6]. 

2.1.4 Dust opacity and porosity 

To calculate the disk temperature, emission height, and cooling timescale, we use the frequency-dependent, e ff ective dust extinc-tion opacity per dust mass, denoted as κd,ν (a). For a given dust grain size a and a a given frequency ν, we evaluate κd,ν (a) as 

κd,ν (a) = κabs ,ν (a) + κsca ,eff ,ν (a), (15) where κabs ,ν and κsca ,eff ,ν are the dust absorption and e ff ective dust scattering opacities per unit dust mass at di ff erent frequencies ν.Here, the e ff ective dust scattering opacity is given by 

κsca ,eff ,ν (a) = 1 − gν(a) κsca ,ν (a), (16) where κsca ,ν is the scattering opacity per unit dust mass and gν is the asymmetry parameter at di ff erent frequencies ν. Because the second term in equation (15) represents the scattering opacity for isotropic scattering, κd,ν (a) corresponds to the e ff ective extinction opacity. We also define the dust albedo as 

ων(a) ≡ κsca ,eff ,ν (a)

κd,ν (a) . (17) To calculate the disk temperature in section 2.1.2, we use the average of the dust albedo weighted by the dust surface density at a frequency of ν, ⟨ων⟩, given by 

⟨ων⟩ = ⟨κsca ,eff ,ν ⟩⟨κd,ν ⟩ . (18) Here, ⟨κsca ,eff ,ν ⟩ and ⟨κd,ν ⟩ are the averages of the scattering and extinction dust opacities weighted by the dust surface density at a frequency of ν, defined as 

⟨κsca ,eff ,ν ⟩ ≡ 

R κsca ,eff ,ν (a)md(a) dN d (a) 

> da

da 

Σdust 

, (19) and 

⟨κd,ν ⟩ ≡ 

R κd,ν (a)md(a) dN d (a) 

> da

da 

Σdust 

, (20) respectively. Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 5

For the fiducial model, we use the opacity model based on Ricci et al. (2010) to compute κd,ν . Following Zormpas et al. (2022) and Delussu et al. (2024), we assume spherical dust grains composed of a mixture of astronomical silicates (Draine 2003), amorphous carbon (Zubko et al. 1996), and water ice (Warren & Brandt 2008) with a volume mixing ratio of 1:2:3 (Ricci et al. 2010). The ma-terial density of the dust grains, ρm, is set to 1 .6 g cm −3, assuming intrinsic material densities of 3 .3, 1 .8, and 0 .92 g cm −3 for astro-nomical silicates, amorphous carbon, and water ice, respectively (Dominik et al. 2021). Alternative opacity models that assume di ff erent dust composi-tions from our fiducial model lead to changes in κd,ν and thereby aff ect the optical depth and dust albedo. In appendix 3, we describe these alternative opacity models and investigate their impacts on our results. However, within our analytic model, the choice of opacity model has only a minor e ff ect on the estimated dust grain size (see appendix 6). Furthermore, we incorporate dust porosity, which alters both the dust extinction opacities and the internal density of the grains. By introducing porosity, the dust internal density ρint can be expressed as 

ρint = fdust ρm, (21) where fdust is the dust filling factor. For completely compact grains, fdust = 1, whereas for highly porous grains, fdust approaches zero. To calculate κabs ,ν , κsca ,ν , and gν for a given dust grain size a

and filling factor fdust under a specific opacity model, we utilize the optool package (Dominik et al. 2021). The profiles of κabs ,ν ,

κsca ,eff ,ν , and gν as functions of the dust grain size, for di ff erent opacity models and filling factors, are presented in figure 16 in appendix 3. 

2.1.5 Emission /scattering surface height 

Using the dust vertical distribution and opacity models, we cal-culate the emission and scattering surface heights, zemi and zsca ,respectively, probed by observations at a given frequency ν. The vertical optical depth measured from infinity down to a height z is given by 

τν(z) =

Z ∞

> z

dz ′

Z

da m d(a)κd,ν (a) dn d(a, z′)

da . (22) Both zemi and zsca are defined analogously, as the height z that sat-isfies τν(z)

μ′ = 1, (23) where μ′ denotes the sine of the grazing angle between the radia-tion and the local disk surface, and takes a di ff erent value for each case, as described below. This height approximates the e ff ective height of the emitting or scattering layer. If the disk is optically so thin that τ(z = 0) < μ ′, we set the emission /scattering height to the disk midplane ( zemi = 0 and zsca = 0). For the emission surface height at submillimeter wavelengths, 

zemi , the relevant radiation is that received along the line of sight to the observer, so we set μ′ to the disk’s inclination μ. For the scatter-ing surface height at near-infrared wavelengths, zsca , the relevant radiation is starlight incident on the disk surface. Therefore, μ′

corresponds to the sine of the grazing angle at which this starlight illuminates the surface. Under the small-angle approximation, this grazing angle can be approximated by the aspect ratio of the scat-tering surface, zsca /R. We accordingly adopt μ′ = 0.1, which is consistent with zsca /R ≈ 0.1 derived for the disk analyzed in this study (see subsection 4.2.1). 

2.1.6 Cooling model 

The spatial profile of the gas disk cooling rate depends on the size and spatial distribution of the dust particles (Malygin et al. 2017; Barranco et al. 2018; Fukuhara et al. 2021; Bae et al. 2021). Based on our dust model, we approximate the local cooling (thermal re-laxation) timescale tcool as (Malygin et al. 2017; Pfeil & Klahr 2019; Fukuhara & Okuzumi 2024) 

tcool (z) = max {tdi ff (z), tcoll (z), temit (z)}, (24) where tdi ff , tcoll , and temit are the timescales of radiative di ff usion, collisional heat transfer, and radiative cooling, respectively. For 

tdi ff and temit , we use equations (17), (18), and (21) of Fukuhara & Okuzumi (2024) 1.Because we focus on optically thin outer disk regions, colli-sional heat transfer dominates the cooling process in most of our cases (see also section 4.2). The timescale tcoll of collisional heat transfer between the gas molecules and dust particles is given by (Burke & Hollenbach 1983; Barranco et al. 2018; Pfeil et al. 2023) 

tcoll = γγ − 1

ℓgd 

vth 

, (25) where vth is the mean relative velocity between the gas molecules and dust particles and γ is the heat capacity ratio, which we set to 1.4. In this study, we approximate vth as the mean thermal speed of the gas molecules: vth = p8kBT/π mg.

2.2 Observational estimation of the cooling timescale 

2.2.1 Inferring the cooling time from azimuthal relaxation 

In this section, we describe how we infer the radiative cooling timescale directly from observational diagnostics. The basic ge-ometry of the method is illustrated in the left panel of figure 2. By relating the spatial o ff set from the observed shadow boundary to the advection time under Keplerian rotation, we convert an ob-served azimuthal relaxation pattern into an estimate of tcool .We estimate the cooling timescale from the observed azimuthal relaxation of the disk temperature across a shadow boundary, as schematically shown in the right panel of figure 2. We assume that a dust advected by Keplerian rotation relaxes toward a local equi-librium, or target, temperature Ttar on a characteristic timescale 

tcool . Let ϕR be the azimuthal angular distance from the observed shadow boundary, measured along the direction of rotation. Under the assumption of first-order cooling, the temperature evolution is written as 

T (ϕR) = Ttar + (Tini − Ttar ) exp 

"

− ϕR

tcool ,est ΩK

#

, (26) where Tini is the temperature immediately upstream of the bound-ary and tcool ,est is the cooling timescale inferred from observations. In practice, we first locate the shadow boundary from the scattered-light geometry reconstruction described in section 2.2.2. We then construct an azimuthal brightness-temperature profile, 

Tb(ϕR), from the continuum data at each radius and use this bright-ness temperature as T in equation (26). The continuum specific intensity at a frequency ν, Iν, is converted to Tb by inverting the Planck function, 

Tb = hν

kB

"

ln 1 + 2hν3

c2 Iν

!# −1

, (27) where h is the Planck constant and c is the light speed. Finally, we fit equation (26) to the observed azimuthal temperature profile to obtain tcool ,est ΩK.           

> 1Note that tdi ff and temit correspond to τdi ff and τemit in Fukuhara & Okuzumi (2024), respectively. 6Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0

# ϕR

# 0∘

# R

# Tini  Shadow area 

## Temperature 

## drop 

# ϕR [rad ]

> T [K]

## Rotation 

## direction 

## Rotation direction 

## 0.0  0.25  0.5  0.75 

# (a) (b)       

> Fig. 2. Schematic illustration of the observational method used to estimate the cooling timescale from the azimuthal temperature variation across a disk shadow. (a) Geometry of the disk at a representative radius R. The shadowed sector is shown in black and is bounded by the shadow edges indicated in red. The azimuthal angular distance ϕRis measured from the upstream shadow boundary along the direction of disk rotation. (b) Schematic temperature profile along the same annulus. The temperature initially equals Tini , decreases as the disk material passes through the shadowed region, and subsequently recovers after leaving the shadow as it relaxes toward the unshadowed equilibrium temperature. The red solid and dashed vertical lines mark the entrance and exit boundaries of the shadow, respectively.

2.2.2 Determination of the Shadow Boundaries 

We reconstruct the three-dimensional scattering-surface geometry of the outer disk using the shadow-based framework developed by Orihara & Momose (2025). This framework jointly fits the hori-zon curve, the shadow boundaries, and the apparent outer-edge curve in scattered-light images. Simultaneously fitting these fea-tures constrains the radial variation of the outer-disk scattering-surface height, together with the orientation and finite thickness of the inner disk. We adopt the same coordinate system, geomet-ric definitions, and analytic construction of the model curves as in Orihara & Momose (2025), and summarize below only the param-eterization relevant to our analysis. Following Orihara & Momose (2025), we express the outer-disk scattering surface as a parametric surface So(Hsurf ,ϕ o) in the outer-disk frame, where Hsurf is the surface height above the midplane and ϕo is the azimuthal angle. The cylindrical radius is modeled as a function of height, R(Hsurf ), parameterized by 

R(Hsurf ) =

"

Rq 

> c

+ (Rq 

> c

− Rq 

> e

) |Hsurf |

Hsurf ,c

!q#1/q

, (28) where Re is the radius of the inner edge of the outer disk, Rc is a characteristic radius, Hsurf ,c is the surface height at Rc, and q con-trols the curvature of the scattering surface (see figure 1 of Orihara & Momose 2025). We follow Orihara & Momose (2025) to extract and fit the hori-zon curve, the shadow boundaries, and the apparent outer-edge curve from scattered-light images. Specifically, we sample data points from pixels with large image gradients to construct three sets of points corresponding to the horizon, the shadow bound-aries, and the apparent outer edge. The horizon and apparent outer-edge points are identified from the positive and negative com-ponents of the radial image gradients, respectively, whereas the shadow-boundary points are identified from the azimuthal image gradients. We then fit these three point sets simultaneously with the corresponding model curves by minimizing the residual dis-tances, thereby estimating the best-fit parameters. 

2.3 Calculation procedure 

We constrain the maximum dust grain size amax and the dust sur-face density Σdust by comparing the cooling timescale estimated from observations, tcool ,est , with that calculated from an analytic model, tcool ,cal (see also figure 1). First, we estimate the local cool-ing timescale from the near-infrared and submillimeter observa-tions in the following steps. 1. Reconstruct the three-dimensional scattering-surface geometry from near-infrared scattered-light observations using equation (28), and identify the shadowed regions cast on the outer disk. 2. Obtain the azimuthal brightness temperature profile in the outer disk region using submillimeter dust thermal emission observa-tions. In this step, we approximate the brightness temperature as the local disk temperature, assuming that the emission is op-tically thick at the observed wavelength. 3. Estimate the empirical cooling timescale tcool ,est in the shad-owed region from the azimuthal temperature profile using equa-tion (26). This estimate assumes that the temperature varia-tion reflects the gas’s thermal relaxation as it passes through the shadow. Second, we use an analytic model to calculate the cooling timescale for a given dust grain size and dust surface density, fol-lowing the steps below. 4. Determine the dust size distribution for a given set of amax and 

Σdust using equation (1) to obtain a theoretically predicted cool-ing timescale from the analytic model. 5. Estimate the disk temperature using equation (4) based on the observed dust thermal emission intensity and the assumed dust Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 7

size distribution. 6. Calculate the vertical density distributions of the gas and dust using equations (9) and (10). 7. Determine the emission height zemi at the observed submillime-ter wavelength using equation (23) based on the adopted dust opacities. Simultaneously, compute the vertical distribution of the cooling timescale using equation (24). 8. Extract the theoretical cooling timescale at this emission height, which we denote hereafter as tcool ,cal ≡ tcool (zemi ). Finally, we compare the calculated cooling timescale tcool ,cal 

with the observationally derived value, tcool ,est , to evaluate whether the assumed amax and Σdust successfully reproduce the observa-tionally derived cooling timescale. We repeat steps 4 through 8 for every set of amax and Σdust within our parameter space (see subsec-tion 3.3) to search for the ranges that best match the observational data. We note that because a single observational constraint (the cooling timescale) is compared against two free parameters ( amax 

and Σdust ), the best-fit parameter set is not uniquely determined, and the model remains degenerate. 

3 Observation data of the HD 142527 disk and parameter choices 

We apply the methods described in Section 2 to the protoplanetary disk around HD 142527. This is a young Herbig Ae /Be system located at a distance of approximately 157 pc (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023), with an age of about 3 Myr. The primary star has a mass of M⋆ ≃ 2.4M⊙ (Fukagawa et al. 2013; Arun et al. 2019). The disk around HD 142527 is a well-studied transitional disk system characterized by a large dust-depleted cavity and a highly non-axisymmetric outer disk. Previous infrared and millimeter observations have shown that the disk contains a prominent cav-ity extending to ∼ 140 au, while substantial gas remains inside the cavity (Perez et al. 2015). The outer disk exhibits a strong azimuthal asymmetry in the millimeter continuum emission, of-ten interpreted as a dust trap (Fukagawa et al. 2013; Casassus et al. 2015). In scattered-light observations, two localized inten-sity decrements have been identified along the outer disk and in-terpreted as shadows cast by a misaligned inner disk (Marino et al. 2015; Avenhaus et al. 2017). These properties make HD 142527 a particularly suitable target for investigating how stellar irradiation blocked by the inner disk a ff ects the outer disk’s thermal struc-ture. Although the system hosts a low-mass companion of approx-imately 0 .2M⊙, we do not include it in the analytic model because its orbit is too compact to account for the outer disk features con-sidered here (Nowak et al. 2024). 

3.1 Near-infrared data 

To extract the three-dimensional morphology of the shadows pro-jected onto the outer disk surface, we apply the method of Orihara & Momose (2025) to a near-infrared scattered-light image of the HD 142527 disk. We use the publicly available H-band polarimet-ric di ff erential image presented by Hunziker et al. (2021), obtained with the InfraRed Dual-band Imager and Spectrograph (IRDIS) of the Spectro-Polarimetric High-contrast Exoplanet REsearch in-strument (SPHERE) at the Very Large Telescope (VLT). The im-age is a reduced FITS product based on the SPHERE /IRDIS broad-band H-band (1 .625 μm) observations obtained on May, 31, 2017. The image has a format of 1024 × 1024 pixels, a pixel scale of 12 .27 mas pixel −1, and an angular resolution of 44 mas. 2

We use the H-band Qϕ image shown in figure 3(a) of section 4.1 for the shadow analysis, adopting the same outer-disk geometry as in the temperature analysis below, namely the inclination and po-sition angle of the outer disk. The Qϕ signal is obtained by trans-forming the Stokes Q and U images into the azimuthal polarization basis centered on the star, and mainly traces the linearly polarized component of stellar light scattered by the disk surface. It is there-fore suitable for investigating both the scattered-light distribution and the non-axisymmetric illumination pattern on the outer-disk surface. In this work, we interpret the azimuthally localized dark regions in the Qϕ image as shadows cast onto the outer-disk sur-face by the misaligned inner disk or by material close to the central star. To assess the significance of the scattered-light structures, we construct a signal-to-noise ratio (S /N) map using the Uϕ image shown in figure 14(b) of appendix 1 as an empirical estimate of the residual noise. For single scattering under centro-symmetric illumination, polarized scattered light is expected to be contained predominantly in Qϕ, whereas Uϕ should contain little astrophysi-cal signal and is therefore often used as a practical noise estimate in polarized images (e.g., Canovas et al. 2015). However, non-azimuthal polarization signals can appear in Uϕ owing to e ff ects such as multiple scattering. Therefore, the S /N map used here should be regarded not as a strict statistical significance map, but as an empirical measure of the scattered-light structures relative to the local residual level. Specifically, we measure the rms fluc-tuation of the Uϕ image in concentric annuli centered on the star to obtain a radial noise profile, Uϕ, rms (r). The resulting S /N map, shown in figure 14(c) of appendix 1, is defined as Qϕ/Uϕ, rms (r) and is used both to evaluate the local significance of the scattered-light structures and to weight the fitting data in the shadow reconstruc-tion. For the gradient-based extraction of the geometric features, we first apply an inverse hyperbolic sine stretch to the S /N map and then calculate the image gradients. The asinh transformation en-hances faint but significant structures while preserving the sign of the signal and remaining approximately linear around zero. These properties are important because the S /N map can contain zero or negative values owing to noise and residual systematics, for which a logarithmic stretch is not well defined. From the gradients of the asinh-stretched S /N map, we identify candidate data points for the horizon curve, shadow boundaries, and apparent outer-edge curve. Specifically, the shadow-boundary points are sampled from pixels with large azimuthal gradients, ∇(S /N) · ˆeϕ, as shown in fig-ure 14(d) of appendix 1, because the shadows appear as localized brightness variations along the azimuthal direction. The horizon-curve points are sampled from pixels with large positive radial gradients, ∇(S /N) · ˆer > 0, shown in figure 14(e) of appendix 1, whereas the apparent outer-edge points are sampled from pixels with large negative radial gradients, ∇(S /N) · ˆer < 0, shown in fig-ure 14(f) of appendix 1. We then simultaneously fit the sampled data points with the cor-responding model curves for the horizon, shadow boundaries, and apparent outer edge. In the MCMC fitting, each sampled point is weighted by its local S /N value, so that higher-significance features have a larger contribution to the likelihood than lower-significance or noise-dominated points. This weighting scheme allows the model to be constrained primarily by robust scattered-     

> 2The IRDIS H-band FITS product used here is available from the CDS /VizieR catalogue J /A+A/648 /A110, HD142527 SPHERE polarimetric images .The corresponding ESO programme ID is 099.C-0601(A). 8Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0

light structures while still using the full set of gradient-selected data points. The posterior distributions of the model parameters are explored with an MCMC sampler implemented with emcee 

(Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013). 

3.2 Submillimeter data 

We use archival ALMA Band 9 data from project 2015.1.00614.S. The calibrated measurement sets were provided by the East Asian ALMA Regional Center following a support request. Starting from these calibrated visibility data, we performed our own contin-uum imaging and self-calibration using the Common Astronomy Software Applications package (CASA; CASA Team et al. 2022). In the self-calibration procedure, scans and spectral windows were combined to derive the calibration solutions. We first car-ried out iterative phase-only self-calibration with solution inter-vals of solint=inf , 60s , 30s , and 10s , followed by one final amplitude-and-phase self-calibration with solint=inf . The con-tinuum emission was deconvolved using multiscale CLEAN with spatial scales of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 5 times the synthesized beam size. The self-calibration improved the peak signal-to-noise ratio from 22 to 67, while leaving the integrated continuum flux of the disk essentially unchanged. The final self-calibrated image has a synthesized beam of 0 .26 ′′ × 0.21 ′′ and an rms noise level of 8 × 10 −3 Jy beam −1. We converted the continuum specific intensity to brightness temperature by inverting the Planck function given in equation 27. The resulting brightness-temperature map, shown in figure 4(a) of section 4.1, was used to derive the azimuthal temper-ature distribution. 

3.3 Parameter choices 

Throughout this study, we adopt a fixed outer-disk geometry with an inclination of io = 27 ◦ and a position angle of PA o = 341 ◦, fol-lowing the values reported by Fukagawa et al. (2013). The same geometry is used consistently in both the shadow analysis and the continuum temperature analysis. In the shadow analysis, all other geometric parameters are treated as free parameters. These include the sky-plane o ff sets of the outer-disk center, ( cox, coy); the inner-edge radius of the outer disk, Re; the surface height, Hsurf ,c, at the characteristic radius, 

Rc; the power-law index, q, of the outer-disk surface profile; the apparent outer-edge radius of the outer disk, Rout ; the inclination and position angle of the inner disk, ( ii, PA i); and the maximum aspect ratio of the shadow-casting inner structure, hr. The inner-disk center is assumed to coincide with the stellar position, and the sky-plane o ff sets ( cix, ciy) are therefore fixed to (0 , 0). To estimate the cooling timescale, we adopted uniform priors of 27–30 K and 30–32 K for the asymptotic temperature, Ttar , and the initial temperature, Tini , respectively. We then used MCMC sam-pling to infer the posterior distributions of the model parameters. The dimensionless cooling timescale, tcool ΩK, was constrained us-ing the 68% Bayesian credible interval of its marginalized poste-rior distribution. For the analytic calculation of the cooling timescale, we use the intensity of dust thermal emission at ALMA Band 9 submil-limeter wavelengths. We fix the radial distance R to 170 au and the observed dust thermal emission intensity at this radius, Iν, obs ,to 0 .4 Jy beam −1 with the beam of 0 .26 ′′ × 0.21 ′′ at an observ-ing frequency of ν = 697 GHz (corresponding to a wavelength of λ = 0.43 mm). In the analytic model, the mass of the cen-tral star and outer disk inclination are set to M⋆ = 2.4M⊙ and 

i = 27 ◦, respectively. As main constrained parameters, we con-sider the maximum size of dust grains amax for the power-law size distribution model or the size of dust grains a1 for the single-sized model, and dust surface density Σdust . We divide the pa-rameter ranges 10 μm < a < 1 cm or 10 μm < amax < 1 cm and 0.1 g cm −2 < Σdust < 10 g cm −2 into grids of equal logarithmic in-tervals of 0 .1. In addition to the dust grain size and dust surface density, our model involves five free parameters: the gas surface density Σgas , the slope of the size distribution p, the minimum dust grain size amin , the dust filling factor fdust , and opacity models. Our parameter sets are summarized in table 1. As the fiducial model, we select Σgas = 10 g cm −2, p = −2.5, amin = 1 μm, fdust = 1.0, and Ricci opacity model. 

4 Results 

In this section, we present the results of applying our method de-scribed in section 2 to the protoplanetary disk around HD 142527. We begin by determining the shadow geometry and estimating the cooling timescale at the disk using the infrared-wavelength scat-tered light and millimeter-wavelength dust thermal emission ob-servations in subsection 4.1. We then show the constraint for the maximum dust grain size that can reproduce the observationally estimated cooling timescale in subsection 4.2. 

4.1 Estimation of the cooling time 

We aim to estimate the cooling timescale of the outer disk around HD 142527 by comparing the three-dimensional shadow morphol-ogy traced in infrared scattered light with the azimuthal tempera-ture distribution traced by the ALMA Band 9 continuum emission. 

4.1.1 Shadow morphology on the disk scattering surface 

Following the procedure described in section 2.2.2, we extracted high-gradient structures from the S /N map constructed from the H-band Qϕ image and simultaneously fitted the horizon, shadow-boundary, and apparent outer-edge curves. The western side of the HD 142527 outer disk is not well suited to robust boundary extraction with this procedure because its scattered-light morphology contains spiral-like structures and other non-axisymmetric features (see figure 3(a)). We therefore sample boundary points only on the eastern side of the disk, where the apparent outer edge is more clearly traced in the H-band Qϕ

image (see figure 14). The center of the inner disk is assumed to coincide with the stellar position. We therefore fix the sky-plane o ff sets of the inner disk center to ci,x = ci,y = 0, where ci,x and ci,y denote the o ff sets in the declination and R.A. directions, respectively. With this as-sumption, the fitted inner-disk parameters describe the orientation and vertical extent of the shadow-casting structure, rather than any astrometric displacement of its center. Figure 3 shows the best-fit shadow and scattering-surface model for the HD 142527 disk. Panel (a) shows the H-band Qϕ im-age overlaid with the best-fit curves, which trace the outer-disk boundary and the shadow boundaries. Panel (b) presents a three-dimensional view of the reconstructed scattering-surface model, illustrating the geometry of the outer disk surface and the shad-owed regions. The model reproduces the locations of the two az-imuthally localized dark regions, supporting the interpretation that these features are shadows cast by a misaligned inner disk. The best-fit values are summarized in table 2, while the corre-Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 9 

> Table 1. Parameter choices for the analytic model presented in section 2 for all runs.

Model Σgas p amin fdust opacity model Fiducial 10 g cm −2 −2.5 1 μm 1.0 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.1 Low-Gas 1 g cm −2 −2.5 1 μm 1.0 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.2 Single-Size 10 g cm −2 – – 1.0 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.3 Steep-SizeDis 10 g cm −2 −3.5 1 μm 1.0 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.3 Small-amin 10 g cm −2 −2.5 0.1 μm 1.0 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.3 Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin 10 g cm −2 −3.5 0.1 μm 1.0 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.3 Mid-Fill 10 g cm −2 −2.5 1 μm 0.3 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.4 Low-Fill 10 g cm −2 −2.5 1 μm 0.1 Ricci opacity subsection 4.2.4 DIANA 10 g cm −2 −2.5 1 μm 1.0 DIANA opacity appendix 6 DSHARP 10 g cm −2 −2.5 1 μm 1.0 DSHARP opacity appendix 6 H/R = 0.2 

H/R = 0.1 

H/R = 0.3 

H/R = 0.4 

# (a) (b) (c)sinh −1 Qϕ   

> Fig. 3. Best-fit scattering-surface model for the HD 142527 disk. (a) H-band Qϕimage overlaid with the best-fit model curves. The blue curve indicates the horizon of the outer disk, the red curves show the reconstructed shadow boundaries, and the green curve shows the apparent outer edge of the outer disk. The blue cross and red star mark the positions of the outer-disk center and the central star, respectively. (b) Three-dimensional view of the best-fit scattering-surface model. The black regions indicate the shadowed areas where the inner structure blocks stellar irradiation. The colored curves have the same meanings as in panel (a). (c) Surface-height profile of the best-fit scattering surface, shown as the black curve, over the radial range where the shadow boundaries are detected. The right edge of the profile corresponds to the radius of the apparent outer edge of the outer disk.

sponding posterior distributions are shown in the corner plot pre-sented in figure 15 of appendix 2. The best-fit inner-disk geometry has an inclination of ii = 34 ◦ and a position angle of PA i = 179 ◦.Together with the fixed outer-disk geometry, these values imply a misalignment angle of ∆θmis ∼ 60 ◦ between the inner and outer disks. The maximum aspect ratio of the optically obscuring inner disk is hr = 0.16, representing the maximum height-to-radius ratio of the optically thick dusty component that blocks stellar irradia-tion and casts shadows on the outer disk surface. The inner edge of the outer disk is located at Re = 147 au. At the characteristic radius Rc = 200 au, the scattering surface has a height of Hsurf ,c = 88 au and a power-law index of q = 3.92. These parameters describe the three-dimensional scattering surface of the outer disk traced by H-band polarized scattered light. The resulting outer-disk surface-height profile is shown in figure 3(c). Over the radial range in which the shadow boundaries are detected, from 

Re = 147 au to Rout = 191 au, the surface aspect ratio Hsurf /R

ranges from 0.2 to 0.4. This indicates that the H-band scattered light traces a vertically elevated dust surface rather than the disk midplane. We use the inferred surface geometry to deproject the shadow locations onto the three-dimensional outer-disk surface. 

4.1.2 Cooling timescale of the outer disk 

We next compare the reconstructed shadow geometry with the az-imuthal temperature distribution inferred from the ALMA Band 9 continuum image. Because the Band 9 continuum emission is ex-pected to be dominated by optically thick dust thermal emission, the observed brightness temperature can be interpreted as the tem-perature around the emitting layer defined in equation (23). This emitting layer is also shown in the left panel of figure 17. Figure 4 compares the reconstructed shadow geometry with the ALMA Band 9 continuum emission and the corresponding az-imuthal temperature profile. Panel (a) shows the ALMA Band 9 continuum image overlaid with the surface grid of the best-fit scattering-surface model. This surface grid is the same as that shown in figure 3(b). The red curves indicate the northern shadow boundaries reconstructed on the outer-disk scattering surface from the shadow analysis, whereas the black curves show the corre-sponding shadow boundaries projected onto the outer-disk mid-plane. Panel (b) shows the azimuthal temperature profile at a ra-dius of 170 au from the outer-disk center. The horizontal axis rep-resents the azimuthal angle measured in the outer-disk midplane, while the vertical axis represents the brightness temperature of the dust continuum emission. The black vertical lines in panel (b) cor-respond to the shadow boundaries shown by the black curves in panel (a) on the disk midplane. Because the disk rotates clock-wise, the left line corresponds to the leading boundary, where disk material enters the shadowed region, whereas the right line cor-responds to the trailing boundary, where disk material exits the shadowed region. A comparison of the shadow-entry boundary with the brightness-temperature data points in figure 4(b) suggests that the 10 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0  

> Table 2. Disk Model Parameters for HD 142527

Parameter Description Search range Solution Error Unit [min, max] 

cox Off set of the outer-disk center in the x-direction (Dec) [−30, 30] −19 .63 +0.306  

> −0.295

[au] 

coy Off set of the outer-disk center in the y-direction (RA) [−30, 30] 1.73 +0.255  

> −0.258

[au] 

Re Radius of the inner edge of the outer disk [120, 160] 146 .75 +0.429  

> −0.429

[au] 

Hsurf ,c Height of the outer-disk surface at Rc = 200 au [5, 100] 88 .18 +2.161  

> −2.067

[au] 

Rout Radius of the apparent outer edge of the outer disk [185, 250] 191 .18 +0.731  

> −0.679

[au] 

q Power index of the outer-disk surface [2, 5] 3.92 +0.205  

> −0.209

[ ] 

cix Off set of the inner-disk center in the x-direction (Dec) 0 (fixed) – – [au] 

ciy Off set of the inner-disk center in the y-direction (RA) 0 (fixed) – – [au] 

ii Inclination of the inner disk [0, 90] 34 .11 +0.924  

> −0.912

[◦]PA i Position angle of the inner disk [0, 360] 179 .35 +0.379  

> −0.338

[◦]

hr Maximum aspect ratio of the inner disk [0.05, 0.2] 0.16 +0.003  

> −0.003

[ ] (a) (b)   

> Fig. 4. Comparison between the reconstructed shadow geometry and the azimuthal temperature variation in the HD 142527 outer disk. (a) ALMA Band 9 brightness-temperature image overlaid with the surface grid of the best-fit scattering-surface model. The red curves indicate the shadow boundaries reconstructed on the outer-disk surface, while the black curve in the northern region shows the corresponding boundary projected onto the disk midplane. The gray dashed curve marks a radius of

170 au in the midplane. The white grid represents the corresponding coordinates on the disk surface. The synthesized beam is shown in the lower-left corner. (b) Azimuthal brightness-temperature profile at R = 170 au , shown as a function of the angular distance ϕR from the upstream shadow boundary in the direction of disk rotation. The vertical lines mark the entrance and exit boundaries of the shadowed region. The blue points show the observed brightness temperatures sampled at intervals of 0.2 synthesized beams, with error bars derived from the rms noise of the continuum image. The orange points indicate the subset of the sampled data used for the model fitting. The green curve represents the pointwise posterior median of the cooling model, and the gray shaded region indicates the central 68% Bayesian credible interval. The horizontal scale bar indicates the azimuthal extent of one synthesized beam at R = 170 au .

temperature begins to decrease upstream of the leading boundary. However, this apparent decrease does not necessarily indicate the physical onset of cooling and is likely a ff ected by convolution with the finite synthesized beam. At a radius of 170 au, the synthesized beam corresponds to an azimuthal angular scale of approximately 0.24 rad. Consequently, the temperature structure may be substan-tially smoothed near the shadow boundary, where the azimuthal temperature gradient is steep. Determining the onset of cooling from the millimeter continuum image alone could therefore lead to a misidentification of its physical location. This further high-lights the importance of independently determining the shadow boundaries from scattered-light observations when estimating the cooling timescale. In the limit of an instantaneous thermal response, the tempera-ture minimum is expected to coincide with the midplane-projected shadow position. However, if cooling takes a finite time, an an-gular o ff set arises between the projected shadow position and the resulting temperature minimum. The observed temperature profile therefore traces the shadow-induced azimuthal temperature vari-ation at R = 170 au while accounting for the three-dimensional projection of the shadow boundaries. The measured angular o ff set between the projected shadow position and the temperature mini-mum is used to estimate the cooling timescale of the outer disk. We model the shadow-induced temperature decrease using equation (26). In this model, after disk material enters the shad-owed region, the dust temperature is assumed to relax toward the equilibrium temperature within the shadow over a finite cooling timescale. As shown in figure 4(b), this model is fitted to the az-Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 11 

imuthal temperature profile at a radius of 170 au from the outer-disk center. The gray shaded region indicates the 68% posterior credible interval of the fitted temperature profile. The marginal-ized posterior distribution yields a 68% Bayesian credible interval of tcool ,est ΩK = 0.1–0 .4, corresponding to a cooling timescale of ap-proximately 20–90 yr at R = 170 au for the adopted stellar mass of 

M⋆ = 2.4 M⊙. This result indicates that the thermal response time of the outer disk is shorter than the local Keplerian timescale. 

4.2 Estimation of the dust grain size 

In this subsection, we present our constraints on the dust grain size, derived by reproducing the observationally estimated cooling timescale. As shown in subsection 4.1, the observations indicate 0.1 ≲ tcool ,est ΩK ≲ 0.4 in the outer region of the HD 142527 disk. Hereafter, we refer to this requirement as the “cooling condition.” To calculate the vertical distribution of the dust particles, we adopt a vertical dust di ff usion coe ffi cient of αz = 2×10 −3, assuming that the dust grains are vertically mixed by gas turbulence. This adopted value is consistent with the high scattering surface of the outer disk in HD 142527 presented in subsection 4.1, as well as with previous near-infrared observations (Tazaki et al. 2021). We discuss the turbulence-driving mechanisms capable of producing this value of the vertical di ff usion coe ffi cient in section 5. Following the steps described in subsection 2.3, we calculate the theoretical cooling timescale at the emission height, tcool ,cal ,and compare it with the observationally estimated one, tcool ,est , to constrain the dust grain size. In subsection 4.2.1, we present the constraints on the maximum dust grain size for our fiducial model (see table 1 in section 2). Subsequently, in subsections 4.2.2, 4.2.3, and 4.2.4, we explore how these constraints depend on the gas sur-face density, dust size distribution, and dust porosity, respectively. 

4.2.1 Fiducial model 

We find that, in our fiducial model (using the gas surface density of Σgas = 10 g cm −2, slope of the dust size distribution of p = −2.5, minimum grain size of amin = 1 μm, dust filling factor of fdust = 1.0, and Ricci opacity model), the northern region of the HD 142527 disk is predominantly optically thick at the ALMA Band 9 wave-length. Specifically, the vertical extinction optical depth at ALMA Band 9, τall , exceeds unity for the dust surface density Σdust with 

≳ 1 g cm −2, regardless of the maximum grain size amax . In this optically thick regime, we can determine the local disk temper-ature T and gas scale height Hgas . For instance, in the case of 

Σdust = 10 g cm −2, the temperature and gas scale height become constant for amax ≳ 100 μm, yielding T ≈ 35 K and Hgas ≈ 17 au, respectively. Across the explored parameter space, depending on 

Σdust and amax , T varies by up to a factor of ∼ 1.5, causing Hgas to vary accordingly by a factor of ∼ 1.1. We provide further details regarding these dependencies in appendix 4. Based on this vertical structure, for each combination of Σdust 

and amax , we determine the ALMA Band 9 emission height zemi 

and the corresponding calculated cooling timescale, tcool ,cal , to compare with the observationally estimated value. The upper panel of figure 5 illustrates the vertical optical depth profile at ALMA Band 9 for amax = 100 μm and Σdust = 10 g cm −2 in the fidu-cial model. In this case, the ALMA Band 9 emission height zemi ,where τν/μ = 1, is located at ≈ 1.9Hgas . The lower panel displays the vertical distribution of the cooling timescales for amax = 100 μmand Σdust = 10 g cm −2 in the fiducial model. At z ≳ 0.6Hgas , the cooling timescale is dominated by the collisional heat transfer timescale between gas and dust, which is consistent with previous 0 1 2 3

z/H gas 

10 3

10 2

10 1

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

> τν(z)/μ  at ALMA Band 9

zemi 

τν/μ = 1 

0 1 2 3

z/H gas 

10 4

10 3

10 2

10 1

10 0

10 1

10 2

> tcool ΩK

zemi 

tcool , cal                                  

> tcool
> tdiff
> tcoll
> temit
> Fig. 5. Calculated vertical optical depth, τν(z)at ALMA Band 9 [upper panel; equation (22) ], and cooling timescale, tcool [lower panel; equation (24) ], as functions of height zfor amax =100 μmand Σdust =10 g cm −2in the fiducial model. In the upper panel, the horizontal and vertical dashed lines indicate
> τν/μ =1and z=zemi , respectively [see equation (23) ]. In the lower panel, the horizontal and vertical dashed lines denote tcool =tcool ,cal and z=zemi , respec-tively.

studies (e.g., Malygin et al. 2017; Barranco et al. 2018; Fukuhara & Okuzumi 2024). This figure shows that the cooling timescale at 

zemi , tcool ,cal [= tcool (zemi )], is ≈ 0.07 Ω−1K in this case. We note that for all cases in this study, the cooling processes at the emission height are dominated by the collisional heat transfer. Our model also predicts that the scattering surface zsca at a wave-length of 1 .6 μm lies in a range of 0 .2 ≲ zsca /R ≲ 0.35, depending on the dust grain size and dust surface density. These values are consistent with the height of the scattering surface estimated by the near-infrared observation (see figure 3 in section 4.1). Higher dust surface densities yield larger optical depths at ALMA Band 9, resulting in higher emission heights. Figure 6 plots zemi as a function of amax for di ff erent values of Σdust in the fiducial model. As Σdust decreases from 10 g cm −2 to 0 .1 g cm −2,

zemi drops from ≈ 2.1Hgas to 0 (midplane) at amax = 10 μm and from ≈ 1.9Hgas to ≈ Hgas at amax = 100 μm. The emission height at ALMA Band 9 also depends on the max-imum dust grain size. Figure 6 indicates that for Σdust ≥ 1 g cm −2,

zemi remains nearly constant at amax ≲ 100 μm. This is be-12 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

> zemi /H gas  at ALMA Band 9

Fiducial      

> Σdust = 0 .1 g cm −2
> Σdust = 1 g cm −2
> Σdust = 10 g cm −2
> Fig. 6. Calculated ALMA Band 9 emission height

zemi normalized by the gas scale height Hgas as a function of the maximum dust grain size amax for different values of Σdust in the fiducial model. 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

10 3

10 2

10 1

10 0

10 1

> tcool , cal ΩK

observationally estimated 

0.1 < t cool ΩK < 0.4

consistent 

Fiducial, Σdust = 10 g cm −2 

> Fig. 7. Calculated cooling timescale at the ALMA Band 9 emission height,

tcool ,cal , as a function of amax for Σdust = 10 g cm −2 in the fiducial model. The hor-izontal dash-dotted lines mark the upper ( tcool ΩK = 0.4) and lower ( 0.1) limits of the observationally estimated range derived in subsection 4.1. The vertical dashed lines denote the corresponding values of amax that yield these limits. 

cause the dust extinction opacity at ALMA Band 9, κd,ν , is also nearly constant over this range (see figure 16 in appendix 3). For 

Σdust = 0.1 g cm −2, decreasing amax below 100 μm also lowers 

zemi because κd,ν peaks around a ≈ 100 μm at ALMA Band 9. Above this peak, at amax ≳ 100 μm, zemi falls as amax increases be-cause κd,ν decreases with increasing grain size. When amax reaches 1 cm, these heights drop to 0 .5Hgas and the midplane ( zemi = 0) for 

Σdust = 10 g cm −2 and ≤ 1 g cm −2, respectively. Figure 7 displays the calculated cooling timescale at the ALMA Band 9 emission height, tcool ,cal , as a function of amax for Σdust =

10 g cm −2 in the fiducial model. For amax ≲ 100 μm, tcool ,cal in-creases with amax because with zobs remaining nearly constant over this range (see also figure 6), the total geometric cross section per unit volume and thereby the collisional heat transfer timescale de- 

> Fig. 8. Calculated cooling timescale at the ALMA Band 9 emission height,

tcool ,cal , across the amax –Σdust parameter space for the fiducial model (see table 1 for the parameter choice). The dashed contours indicate tcool ΩK = 10 −2, 10 −1,and 1. The horizontally hatched region represents the parameter space that satisfies the observationally estimated cooling condition ( 0.1 ≲ tcool ,est ΩK ≲ 0.4). 

creases. For larger grains, amax aff ects tcool ,cal through two compet-ing e ff ects: the reduction in total geometric cross section, which increases the cooling timescale, and the reduction in the ALMA Band 9 emission height, which decreases it. Up to amax ≈ 8 mm, the former e ff ects dominates, and tcool ,cal continues to increase with 

amax . Beyond this size, the latter e ff ect dominates, and tcool ,cal de-creases with increasing amax , up to 1 cm. Comparing tcool ,cal with the observationally estimated range of 0.1 ≲ tcool ,est ΩK ≲ 0.4, we find that maximum grain sizes in the range of 150 μm ≲ amax ≲ 900 μm successfully reproduce this cool-ing condition. In contrast, grain sizes smaller than 150 μm or larger than 900 μm yield cooling timescales that are too short or too long, respectively, to match the observations. Next, we examine how the calculated cooling timescale and the resulting constraints on the dust grain size depend on the dust sur-face density, Σdust . Figure 8 maps tcool ,cal across the amax –Σdust pa-rameter space for the fiducial model. The figure shows that tcool ,cal 

decreases as Σdust increases. A larger Σdust increases the optical depth and elevates zobs (figure 6). Because the dust density de-creases with height, this elevation reduces the total geometric cross section at the emission height, which by itself would increase the cooling timescale. However, a larger Σdust also directly increases the dust density at any given height, and this e ff ect dominates over the reduction caused by the higher emission height, resulting in a decrease in the cooling timescale. Overall, as the dust surface density decreases, the grain size required to reproduce the observationally estimated cooling timescale also decreases. As shown in figure 8, this required dust grain size scales almost linearly with Σdust . Specifically, the cool-ing condition is satisfied by 50 μm ≲ amax ≲ 200 μm for Σdust =

1 g cm −2, and by 20 μm ≲ amax ≲ 50 μm for Σdust = 0.1 g cm −2.

4.2.2 Case of low gas surface density 

The gas surface density Σgas aff ects the vertical profile of dust num-ber density dn d(a, z)/da , thereby altering the vertical profiles of both the optical depth and the cooling timescale. A lower gas surface density leads to increased Stokes numbers for the dust Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 13    

> Fig. 9. Same as figure 8, but for the Low-Gas model ( Σgas =1.0 g cm −2, see table 1 for other parameter choices).

grains [equations (10)–(13)], which suppresses their vertical dif-fusion. Consequently, dust grains become more concentrated near the midplane, causing the ALMA Band 9 optical depth τν(z) to increase at lower altitudes and decrease at higher altitudes, with the cooling timescale showing the opposite trend (see also section 4.1 of Fukuhara et al. 2021). Since the emission height at ALMA Band 9, zemi , is determined by integrating the optical depth from infinity downward (section 2.1.5), this dust settling naturally re-duces zemi . We present the dependence of zemi on Σgas in figure 19 in appendix 5. This lower emission height, in turn, results in a shorter calcu-lated cooling timescale, tcool ,cal . Figure 9 maps tcool ,cal and the pa-rameter space satisfying the cooling condition in the amax –Σdust 

plane for the Low-Gas model ( Σgas = 1.0 g cm −2, see table 1 for other parameter choices). Compared to the fiducial model (fig-ure 8), tcool ,cal is systematically shorter across the entire parameter space. This is because the local cooling timescale decreases closer to the midplane, as seen in the lower panel of figure 5. To com-pensate for this shorter cooling timescale and successfully repro-duce the observations, the required maximum grain size becomes larger. For instance, to match tcool ,est , our model requires a maxi-mum grain size of 390 μm ≲ amax ≲ 2.0 mm for Σdust = 10 g cm −2,and 90 μm ≲ amax ≲ 480 μm for Σdust = 1 g cm −2. Additionally, because of the extremely low emission height in this model, large grains ( amax ≳ 2 mm) can also satisfy the cooling condition within the range of 0 .3 g cm −2 ≲ Σdust ≲ 7 g cm −2.

4.2.3 Dependence on the dust size distribution 

The slope of the size distribution, p, and the minimum grain size, 

amin , decide the overall dust size distribution. Altering these pa-rameters a ff ects both the ALMA Band 9 emission height and the local cooling timescale, which in turn shifts the maximum grain size required to match the observations. In this subsection, we ex-plore the impact of varying these values, while we set p = −2.5 and 

amin = 1 μm in the fiducial model. Together with amax , these parameters determine the dust number surface density, dN d(a)/da [equation (1)], and the particle number density for each grain size at height z, dn d(a,z)/da [equation (10)]. Consequently, the chosen size distribution alters the total vertical optical depth at ALMA Band 9, τall , [equation (5)], the vertical op-tical depth profile at ALMA Band 9, τν(z), and the vertical cooling timescale distribution tcool (z). However, variations in τall have only a minor e ff ect on our constraints because the disk temperature and gas scale height are relatively insensitive to τall (see figure 17 in ap-pendix 4). Instead, the calculated cooling timescale at the ALMA Band 9 emission height, tcool ,cal , is primarily driven by shifts in the ALMA Band 9 emission height [via τν(z)] and changes in the lo-cal cooling e ffi ciency (via the dust number density). We present the emission heights for these di ff erent size distribution models in figure 19 in appendix 5. Figure 10 maps tcool ,cal and the areas that reproduce tcool ,est for four di ff erent size distributions. From left to right, the panels dis-play the results for the Single-Size model (plotted against a1), the Small-amin model ( amin = 0.1 μm), the Steep-SizeDis model ( p =

−3.5), and the Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin model ( amin = 0.1 μmand p = −3.5). In the Single-Size model (left panel), tcool ,cal is generally longer than in the fiducial model. This is because a con-tinuous size distribution facilitates more e ffi cient collisional heat transfer than a mono-disperse population (Fukuhara & Okuzumi 2024). Consequently, the grain size that satisfies the cooling con-dition is restricted to 20 μm ≲ a1 ≲ 30 μm for Σdust ≳ 0.1 g cm −2,or a1 ≳ 1 mm for Σdust ≳ 1.5 g cm −2.For the Small-amin model (second panel), the dependence of 

tcool ,cal on amax and Σdust closely resembles that of the fiducial model (figure 8). Because the slope of the size distribution is 

p = −2.5 ( > −3), the largest grains dominate both the dust mass budget and the total geometric cross-section. Thus, decreasing the minimum grain size to 0 .1 μm has only a negligible e ff ect on the ALMA Band 9 optical depth and collisional heat trans-fer. The grain size required to reproduce the cooling condition changes only slightly, shifting to 180 μm ≲ amax ≲ 1 mm for 

Σdust = 10 g cm −2.In contrast, tcool ,cal is highly sensitive to the size distribution slope, p. In the Steep-SizeDis model (third panel), the cooling timescale is systematically shorter than in the fiducial model across the entire parameter space. A steeper slope of p = −3.5 ( < −3) im-plies that the smallest grains dominate the total geometric cross-section, enhancing the collisional heat transfer e ffi ciency, even when large grains are present. Due to this rapid cooling, the max-imum grain size required must increase, reaching amax ≳ 1.2 mm for Σdust = 1 g cm −2. For Σdust ≳ 3 g cm −2, cooling becomes so effi cient that no dust population with amax < 1 cm can satisfy the observationally estimated condition. Finally, combining a steep slope with a smaller minimum grain size (the Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin model; right panel) amplifies this e ff ect, reducing the cooling timescale even further. In this sce-nario, cooling is so e ffi cient that only models with very large maxi-mum grain sizes and low dust surface densities can satisfy the cool-ing condition. Specifically, for amax ≲ 1 mm or Σdust ≳ 0.5 g cm −2,the calculated cooling timescales are too short to reproduce the observations. 

4.2.4 Dependence on dust porosity 

So far, we have assumed compact dust grains with a filling fac-tor of fdust = 1.0. Introducing dust porosity (i.e., lowering fdust )decreases the internal density of the grains [equation (21)]. For a given dust surface density, this lower internal density results in a higher total number of dust grains, thereby increasing the total geometric cross section, which makes the gas-dust collisional heat transfer more e ffi cient and shortens the cooling timescale. Porosity also alters the dust opacities (figure 16 in appendix 3) and, through the resulting change in Stokes number, the vertical distribution of 14 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0  

> Fig. 10. Same as figure 8, but for the Single-Size, Small-amin, Steep-SizeDis, and Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin models from left to right (see table 1 for the parameter choice of each model).

the dust density [equation (13)]. Both e ff ects change the emission height at ALMA Band 9 (see figure 19 in appendix 5), and the change in the vertical dust distribution further modifies the verti-cal profile of the cooling timescale, altering tcool ,cal .As expected from the enhanced collisional heat transfer, tcool ,cal 

is shorter than in the fiducial model for any given maximum grain size. Figure 11 maps tcool ,cal across the parameter space for the Mid-Fill model ( fdust = 0.3; upper panel) and Low-Fill model ( fdust = 0.1; lower panel) models. To compensate for this e ffi cient cooling and reproduce the observationally estimated timescale, our model requires larger maximum grain sizes. Specifically, in the Mid-Fill model, the cooling condition is satisfied by 900 μm ≲

amax ≲ 8 mm for Σdust = 10 g cm −2, and by 190 μm ≲ amax ≲ 1.4 mm for Σdust = 1 g cm −2. In the Low-Fill model, the required grain sizes increase even further, reaching amax ≈ 1 cm for Σdust = 10 g cm −2

and amax ≳ 1.7 mm for Σdust = 1 g cm −2.

5 Further constraining dust properties from global VSI condition 

In our analytic model (section 2), we characterize the vertical dis-tribution of dust particles using the dimensionless vertical di ff u-sion coe ffi cient, αz, which represents the strength of turbulent ver-tical di ff usion. While αz is generally a free parameter, we fixed it to αz = 2 × 10 −3 for the HD 142527 disk in section 4.2. This choice is consistent with the high scattering surface derived in section 4.1 and previous near-infrared observations (Tazaki et al. 2021). From a physical /dynamical perspective, however, the intensity of turbulent di ff usion can depend on the local thermodynamic properties. Specifically, the local cooling timescale dictates the strength of turbulence driven by hydrodynamic instabilities (for a review, Lesur et al. 2023). This expectation motivates us to verify whether the cooling timescales obtained in section 4 can self-consistently sustain turbulence at our assumed level of αz =

2 × 10 −3. In this section, we search the amax –Σdust parameter space to identify areas that can reproduce this required level of turbulent di ff usion. A combination of this turbulence condition with the pre-viously established cooling condition gives us a tighter constraint on the dust properties. In this section, we focus on the vertical shear instability (VSI; e.g., Nelson et al. 2013) as a primary turbulence-driving mecha-nism in the outer disk. Section 5.1 outlines a criterion for the VSI to operate e ffi ciently. Section 5.2 then presents the constraints on the dust grain sizes that simultaneously satisfy both the observed cooling condition and the required turbulence level. 

5.1 Condition for VSI-driven turbulence 

Among the hydrodynamic instabilities governed by gas cooling, the VSI (e.g., Urpin 2003; Nelson et al. 2013) is one of the most robust candidates for driving turbulence in the outer regions of pro-toplanetary disks (for a review, Lesur et al. 2023). To drive turbu-lence, the VSI operates in baroclinic disks, relying on a vertical gradient in the gas angular velocity (vertical shear; e.g., Nelson et al. 2013) and rapid gas thermal relaxation (e.g., Lin & Youdin 2015; Manger et al. 2021). Because VSI-driven turbulence is dominated by vertical gas motions (Stoll & Kley 2014; Shari ff &Umurhan 2024; Lesur et al. 2025), it is highly e ffi cient at di ff using dust grains in the vertical direction (Stoll & Kley 2016; Flock et al. 2020; Dullemond et al. 2022). Given the rapid cooling controlled by dust, the VSI can dominate in the outer disk regions (Malygin et al. 2017; Pfeil & Klahr 2019). VSI-driven turbulence can also create a geometrically thick dust layer around the midplane (Flock et al. 2020; Pfeil et al. 2023, 2024), which corresponds to the level of αz = 2 × 10 −3 (Fukuhara et al. 2025). However, this turbulent state is viable only if the cool-ing e ffi ciency within the di ff used dust layer remains su ffi cient to sustain this turbulence intensity. Whether vertical turbulent di ff u-sion can balance dust settling determines whether VSI-driven tur-bulence can be sustained over the long term (Fukuhara & Okuzumi 2024; Fukuhara et al. 2025). Therefore, we can predict the viabil-ity of VSI-driven turbulence by assessing the thickness of the rapid cooling regions derived under our assumed turbulent di ff usion. We obtain the thickness of these VSI-active (rapid cooling) re-gions from the vertical profile of the cooling timescale calculated in section 2.1.6. The local criterion for the VSI can be written as (e.g., Malygin et al. 2017) 

tcool ≲ tcrit , (29) where 

tcrit = |qtemp |

γ − 1

Hgas 

R Ω−1K (30) is the critical cooling time (Lin & Youdin 2015), with qtemp being the radial gradient of the temperature. We refer to regions fulfilling this criterion as VSI-active layers 3. Our model shows that the VSI-active region in the HD 142527 disk extends continuously across the midplane, occupying both the upper ( z > 0) and lower ( z < 0) halves of the disk. Thus, letting zVSI be the height of the active region’s upper boundary, we define the total thickness of the VSI-active layer as ∆LVSI = 2zVSI (Fukuhara et al. 2023).           

> 3Fukuhara et al. (2021) and Fukuhara & Okuzumi (2024) called these VSI zones and VSI-unstable layers, respectively. Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 15
> Fig. 11. Same as figure 8, but for the Mid-Fill model ( fdust =0.3; upper panel) and the Low-Fill model ( fdust =0.1; lower panel).

For VSI-driven turbulence to maintain a strong vertical di ff usion of αz = 2 × 10 −3 in a self-consistent manner, the VSI-active layer must be thicker than two gas scale heights (Fukuhara & Okuzumi 2024; Fukuhara et al. 2025): 

∆LVSI ≳ 2Hgas . (31) Hereafter, we refer to this requirement as the “global VSI condi-tion”. 

5.2 Constraints on dust grain size from the global VSI condition 

We apply the framework developed in the previous subsection to map the thickness of the VSI-active layer, ∆LVSI , across our pa-rameter space. Following the approach in section 4.2, we compute 

∆LVSI for every combination of amax and Σdust defined in section 3.3 to identify the regions that satisfy the global VSI condition [equation (31)]. When evaluating the critical cooling timescale [equation (30)], we assume a radial temperature profile with a slope of |qtemp | = 0.5. 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

> ∆LVSI /H gas

Fiducial                        

> Σdust = 0 .1 g cm −2
> Σdust = 1 g cm −2
> Σdust = 10 g cm −2
> Fig. 12. Thickness of the VSI-active region ∆LVSI as a function of amax for different values of Σdust in the fiducial model (see table 1 for the param-eter choice). The horizontal dash-dotted line marks the critical threshold
> ∆LVSI =2Hgas .The shaded area of ∆LVSI >2Hgas highlights the parameter space that satisfies the global VSI condition, indicating where the VSI can self-consistently drive turbulence at a level of αz=2×10 −3.

Figure 12 illustrates the thickness of the VSI-active region, 

∆LVSI , as a function of the maximum grain size amax for the fidu-cial model (see table 1 for the parameter choice). As amax in-creases, the total geometric cross section of the dust decreases, making cooling via collisional heat transfer less e ffi cient. As a re-sult, the VSI-active region shrinks, eventually becoming infinitely thin. For the dust surface density of Σdust = 10 g cm −2, the global VSI condition is satisfied as long as amax ≲ 1 mm. Decreasing Σdust 

further reduces the cooling e ffi ciency, requiring even smaller dust grains to sustain VSI-driven turbulence. Specifically, the threshold maximum grain size capable of satisfying the global VSI condition decreases to amax ≲ 130 μm for Σdust = 1 g cm −2 and amax ≲ 30 μmfor Σdust = 0.1 g cm −2.By comparing the global VSI condition of ∆LVSI > 2Hgas with the observational estimated cooling timescale of 0 .1 ≲ tcool ,est ΩK ≲

0.4, we identify amax and Σdust that can self-consistently ex-plain both the cooling and the vertical dust distribution in the HD 142527 disk. Figure 13 displays the amax –Σdust parameter spaces that satisfy both conditions for all models, excluding the varying-opacity models. As shown in figure 12, the parameter space satisfying the global VSI condition corresponds to small 

amax and high Σdust . For the fiducial model, the maximum grain sizes satisfying both conditions are 150 μm ≲ amax ≲ 800 μm at 

Σdust = 10 g cm −2, and 46 μm ≲ amax ≲ 150 μm at Σdust = 1 g cm −2.However, at lower Σdust , this overlapping parameter space com-pletely disappears. This is because amax reproducing the esti-mated cooling timescale at low ALMA Band 9 emission heights (zemi < Hgas ; see figure 6) allows the condition tcool < tcrit to satisfy only in regions with a vertical extent smaller than Hgas , thereby failing the global VSI condition. Because the vertical distribution of the cooling timescale de-pends on the gas surface density, the amax –Σdust parameter spaces satisfying the global VSI condition also depend on it. In the Low-Gas model (see table 1 for the parameter choice), no amax satisfies both the cooling and global VSI conditions at any Σdust . Due to 16 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0                                                                   

> amax [cm]
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Σdust  [g cm −2]
> 0.1< t cool ΩK<0.4
> Fiducial
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> Low-Gas
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> Mid-Fill
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> Low-Fill
> 10 310 210 110 0
> a1[cm]
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> Σdust  [g cm −2]
> ∆LVSI >2Hgas
> Single-Size
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> Small-amin
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> Steep-SizeDis
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin
> Fig. 13. Area diagram in the amax –Σdust plane for the models presented in table 1, excluding the varying opacity models. The vertically and horizontally hatched areas indicate the parameter spaces satisfying the global VSI condition [ ∆LVSI >2Hgas ; equation (31) ] and the cooling condition ( 0.1<tcool ,cal ΩK<0.4), respectively. The cross-hatched regions show the parameter spaces satisfying both conditions.

enhanced dust settling, the VSI-active region shrinks toward the midplane (see also Fukuhara et al. 2021), restricting its thickness to less than two gas scale heights and thus failing to drive strong turbulence. Furthermore, the size distribution a ff ects the cooling timescale profile and the resulting VSI-active region. The bottom panels of figure 13 show the parameter diagrams for the di ff erent size dis-tribution models (see table 1 for the parameter choice). For the Single-Size model, the global VSI condition [equation (31)] is sat-isfied only for a1 ≲ 200 μm and Σdust ≳ 0.2 g cm −2. Therefore, of the parameter spaces satisfying the cooling condition, the range with larger grains is excluded; only 20 μm ≲ a1 ≲ 30 μm at 

Σdust ≳ 0.3 g cm −2 satisfies both conditions. For the Small-amin model, the parameter range satisfying both conditions remains similar to that of the fiducial model. Conversely, for steep size dis-tributions, amax is further restricted by the global VSI condition. In the Steep-SizeDis model, the range satisfying both conditions is 1 .2 mm ≲ amax ≲ 3.7 mm at Σdust = 1 g cm −2. For the Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin model, the overlapping parameter space dis-appears entirely. Moreover, dust porosity can alter the parameter space satisfying the global VSI condition by changing the cooling timescale distri-bution. As discussed in section 4.2.4, higher porosity shortens the cooling timescale for a given amax . Reproducing the cooling condi-tion therefore requires larger grains as porosity increases, and the parameter space satisfying the global VSI condition shifts toward larger grain sizes for the same reason. For the Mid-Fill model, both conditions limit the maximum grain size to 900 μm ≲ amax ≲

2.8 mm at Σdust = 10 g cm −2, and 190 μm ≲ amax ≲ 530 μm at 

Σdust = 1 g cm −2. For the Low-Fill model, the overlapping space almost disappears. This trend reflects a di ff erence in how the two conditions depend on fdust : the global VSI condition is determined solely by the vertical profile of the cooling timescale, whereas the cooling condition depends additionally on the emission height, making it more sensitive to fdust than the global VSI condition. We therefore conclude that the dust reproducing both the short cooling timescale and the high scattering surface height must be relatively compact, requiring a filling factor of fdust ≳ 0.1. 

6 General discussion 

6.1 Dust properties and growth limits in the HD 142527 disk 

As demonstrated in section 4.2, the short cooling timescale obser-vationally derived for the HD 142527 disk (section 4.1) can be ex-plained by maximum dust grain sizes in the range of 150 μm ≲

amax ≲ 900 μm with Σgas = Σ dust = 10 g cm −2, p = −2.5, and 

fdust = 1.0. In the northern region of this disk, these inferred sub-millimeter sizes are consistent with estimates from submillimeter polarization observations (Kataoka et al. 2016; Ohashi et al. 2018). However, multi-wavelength dust thermal emission observations in-dicate low spectral indices (Casassus et al. 2015; Soon et al. 2019; Yen & Gu 2020), implying the presence of millimeter-sized dust grains. Since smaller values of fdust and p lead to larger inferred maximum grain sizes in our model (see figures 10, 11, and 13), dust with a relatively porous structure or a steep size distribution may explain the low spectral indices in addition to the short cool-ing timescale. To further constrain dust properties, incorporating multi-wavelength dust continuum emission into the current model should be addressed in future work. Regarding the composition and internal structure, the temper-ature of the outer disk region is estimated to be T ≈ 35 K (see figure 17), which implies that the dust particles would contain abundant volatiles, including H 2O and CO 2 ices. Furthermore, ap-Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 17 

plying the global VSI condition discussed in section 5 suggests that the dust requires a moderate filling factor of fdust ≳ 0.1 (figure 13). Future modeling is necessary to verify whether dust exhibit-ing these specific properties can simultaneously reproduce the full suite of available multi-wavelength observations. From the perspective of grain sticking, a submillimeter maxi-mum size also implies that dust growth in the disk is limited either by collisional fragmentation with a low threshold velocity (e.g., Birnstiel et al. 2011) or by bouncing between dust particles (e.g., Kothe et al. 2013; Arakawa et al. 2023; Dominik & Dullemond 2024; Oshiro et al. 2025). When fragmentation limits dust coag-ulation and turbulent mixing dominates the relative velocities be-tween particles, the maximum grain size determined by fragmen-tation can be approximated as (e.g., Birnstiel et al. 2009, 2012) 

amax ≈ 2Σgas 

πρ int 

v2frag 

c2s

1

αmix 

, (32) where vfrag is the fragmentation threshold velocity, and αmix is the dimensionless parameter characterizing the turbulent mixing of dust particles. Assuming αmix = αz, and substituting the de-rived range of 150 μm ≲ amax ≲ 900 μm alongside αz = 2 × 10 −3

and Σgas = 10 g cm −2 into equation (32), we obtain 1 .0 m s −1 ≲

vfrag ≲ 2.4 m s −1 for compact dust. This low fragmentation veloc-ity is consistent with recent experimental results for water ice at low temperatures (Gundlach et al. 2018; Musiolik & Wurm 2019) and CO 2 ice (Fritscher & Teiser 2021). If bouncing limits dust growth, the maximum grain size reaches approximately 100 μm (e.g., Dominik & Dullemond 2024), which is also consistent with our inferred sizes. To identify the ex-act mechanism determining the dust grain size in the disk, fu-ture work must incorporate numerical dust growth simulations in-cluding fragmentation and bouncing, verifying whether they can simultaneously reproduce the observationally estimated cooling timescale and the high scattering surface. Moreover, the cooling timescale of 20 yr ≲ tcool ,est ≲ 90 yr con-strained in section 4.1 is longer than the collisional heat transfer timescale between gas molecules and dust particles estimated for the disk around TW Hya ( tcoll ∼ 10 yr; Teague et al. 2022). Because the collisional timescale dominates the overall cooling timescale in our model (see the lower panel of figure 5), as is typical for outer disk regions (e.g., Malygin et al. 2017; Pfeil & Klahr 2019), both studies essentially estimate the same physical timescale for di ff er-ent disks. This di ff erence between the HD 142527 and TW Hya disks can be attributed to variations in local and global disk prop-erties, such as disk age, radial location, temperature, gas and dust densities, and dust grain size. Detailed comparative modeling is required in future work to investigate the origin of this timescale di ff erence. 

6.2 Limitation of the presented method 

The method proposed in this paper is subject to several impor-tant limitations that should be addressed in future work. First, we assume that the location of the shadow cast by an axisym-metric, misaligned inner disk remains constant over the relevant cooling timescale. Very recently, near-infrared observations have detected temporal variations in the locations of the brightness dips and peaks in several protoplanetary disks (Mullin et al. 2026), with one possible mechanism being a moving shadow caused by the precession of a misaligned inner disk. Our method remains valid provided that the timescale of the shadow’s temporal variation is su ffi ciently long compared to both the cooling and Keplerian timescales in the outer disk. However, a rapid movement of the shadow could alter the thermal response of the outer disk, thereby aff ecting our estimation of the cooling timescale. Quantifying this eff ect requires detailed modeling of the azimuthal temperature dis-tribution and its time evolution driven by a rapidly moving shadow, which we defer to future work. Second, we assume that the gas and dust in the outer disk re-main in a steady state on Keplerian timescales. Local cooling due to the inner-disk-induced shadow can create azimuthal temperature variations. This asymmetric temperature distribution triggers the formation of gas spirals in the outer disk driven by azimuthal pres-sure gradients (Montesinos et al. 2016; Zhang & Zhu 2024). These spirals can subsequently break up to form ring structures (Zhu et al. 2025) and non-axisymmetric crescents or vortices (Zhang & Zhu 2024). The dominant substructures transition from spirals to rings, and eventually to crescents, as the azimuthal temperature variation increases or the cooling timescale decreases (Su & Bai 2024; Ziampras et al. 2025). Furthermore, these gas substructures can trap millimeter-sized dust particles in the pressure maxima of the spirals (Cuello et al. 2019), leading to the formation of dust rings or crescents via aerodynamic drag (Ziampras et al. 2025). Moreover, Zhang et al. (2025) recently found that azimuthal tem-perature variations in the outer disk, when induced by an inner disk that is neither coplanar nor strictly polar, can develop a warp structure in the outer disk. These e ff ects imply that, in the limit of an extremely short cooling timescale, the shadows cast by the in-ner disk dictate the gas kinematics and the spatial distributions of both gas and dust in the outer disk. Therefore, our derived cooling timescale, which corresponds to a few percent of the orbital period, suggests these warp structures would form over a long time in the HD 142527 disk. To understand this long-term evolution, future disk modeling must incorporate gas and dust dynamics driven by the shadow-induced azimuthal temperature variations. Third, we neglect magnetic fields and self-gravity, both of which can influence the dynamics and distributions of the gas and dust. For the protoplanetary disk around HD 142527, which is the primary target of our application in section 4, Ohashi et al. (2025) recently reported multi-wavelength observations of polarized ther-mal emission and derived a magnetic field strength of ∼ 0.3 mG at a radius of ∼ 200 au in the southern part of the disk. If the magnetic field in the northern part of the disk is comparable to that in the southern part, the gas and dust dynamics may be largely governed by magnetohydrodynamic e ff ects. Additionally, gas self-gravity can alter the disk dynamics via gravitational instabilities. In the HD 142527 disk, polarized scattered-light observations have revealed spiral structures (Avenhaus et al. 2014), suggesting that these features might be driven by the gravitational instability (GI). In our fiducial model, the assumed gas surface density yields a minimum Toomre’s QT parameter of QT ≈ 2.3 (see appendix 4), implying that the disk is currently stable against the GI. However, if we were to assume a more massive disk, the GI could dominate the dust dynamics, which would modify our conclusions. 

6.3 Possible applications to other protoplanetary disks 

The framework presented in this work can be applied to other tran-sition disks that exhibit shadow-like non-axisymmetric structures in their outer disks. Recent high-angular-resolution observations suggest that inner–outer disk misalignments, as inferred for the HD 142527 disk, are present in several transition disk systems. In particular, Bohn et al. (2022) compared inner-disk geometries con-strained by VLTI /GRAVITY with outer-disk geometries derived 18 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 

from ALMA molecular-line observations, and found significant misalignments in several transition disks. In addition, Francis & van der Marel (2020) reported compact inner dust disks inside the cavities of many transition disks, with a substantial fraction of the resolved inner disks being misaligned with their outer disks. These results indicate that the geometric configuration required for an in-ner disk to cast shadows onto an outer disk may not be rare. Promising targets for applying this method are transition disks in which shadows, spirals, or azimuthal brightness asymmetries have been reported in scattered-light and /or ALMA observations. Examples include HD 100453 (Orihara & Momose 2025), J1604– 2130 (Mayama et al. 2012; Pinilla et al. 2018; Mayama et al. 2018), DoAr 44 (Casassus et al. 2018), and CQ Tau (Uyama et al. 2020; Wölfer et al. 2021; Hammond et al. 2022). Applying our method to these systems would enable a systematic investigation of cooling times across disks with di ff erent shadow geometries and disk structures, which we leave for future work. 

7 Conclusions 

We present a novel method that estimates the cooling timescale using multi-wavelength observations and constrains the dust grain size in protoplanetary disks, utilizing shadows in the outer disk caused by the misaligned inner disk (figure 1). We also apply this method to the protoplanetary disk around HD 142527 as a proof-of-concept. Our key findings are summarized as follows. 1. The reconstructed three-dimensional geometry of the shadows projected onto the outer disk is derived from the VLT H-band 

Qϕ scattered-light image. The resulting model indicates that the azimuthally localized dark regions in the scattered-light im-age can be interpreted as shadows cast by an inner disk mis-aligned by approximately 60 ◦ with respect to the outer disk. The shadow-casting structure has a maximum aspect ratio of 

hr = 0.16, suggesting that the optically thick inner dusty com-ponent has a finite vertical extent (figure 3). 2. For HD 142527, the reconstructed shadow geometry is com-pared with the azimuthal temperature distribution derived from the ALMA submillimeter continuum image. After accounting for the projection of the three-dimensional shadows onto the disk midplane, the modeled shadow-induced temperature de-crease yields a dimensionless cooling time of tcool ,est ΩK = 0.1– 0.4 at R = 170 au. For a stellar mass of M⋆ = 2.4 M⊙, this corre-sponds to a cooling timescale of tcool ,est = 20–90 yr. This result suggests that the outer disk of HD 142527 responds thermally to shadowing on a timescale shorter than the local Keplerian timescale (figure 4). 3. We find that submillimeter-sized dust particles can reproduce the observationally estimated cooling timescale. Assuming the compact dust with a size-distribution slope of −2.5, the maxi-mum dust grain size amax reproducing the observationally esti-mated cooling timescale is 150 μm ≲ amax ≲ 900 μm at a dust surface density of Σdust = 10 g cm −2 (figure 7). Grain sizes be-low or above this range yield cooling timescales that are too short or too long, respectively, to match the observations. 4. As the dust surface density decreases, the constrained maxi-mum grain size decreases. If Σdust = 1.0 g cm −2 and 0 .1 g cm −2,the range of maximum grain size reproducing the observation-ally estimated cooling timescale is 50 μm ≲ amax ≲ 200 μm and 20 μm ≲ amax ≲ 50 μm, respectively (figure 8). 5. The constrained dust grain size also depends on the gas surface density, size distribution, and dust filling factor, as well as the dust surface density. The low gas surface density decreases the cooling timescale at the ALMA Band 9 emission height, tcool ,cal 

(figure 9). The size distribution of dust grains a ff ects tcool ,cal 

through changes in both the abundance of each grain size and the total cross section of the dust population (figure 10). Porous dust yields a shorter cooling timescale than compact dust (fig-ure 11). Any physical variation that concentrates dust near the midplane (e.g., a lower gas surface density) or increases the to-tal geometric cross section (e.g., a steeper size distribution, a smaller minimum grain size, or higher porosity) enhances the collisional cooling e ffi ciency, and thus requires a larger amax to reproduce tcool ,est .6. In addition to the condition reproducing tcool ,est , we check the condition explaining the high scattering surface. Assuming the VSI as a turbulence-driving mechanism, we calculate the VSI-active layer’s thickness ∆LVSI and search the amax –Σdust param-eter space that satisfies the ∆LVSI > 2Hgas (global VSI condi-tion), where Hgas is the gas scale height. This condition is one under which the VSI can drive turbulence of su ffi cient intensity to be consistent with the assumed vertical di ff usion coe ffi cient. Considering both cooling and global VSI conditions, we find that Σdust and amax can be further constrained (figure 13). This study demonstrates that estimating cooling timescales is an eff ective tool to constrain dust grain size. Our approach can also be generally applied to other transition disks with inner-disk-induced shadows in the outer disks. 

Funding 

This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Numbers JP24K00674 and JP26KJ0122. 

Acknowledgments 

We thank Shangjia Zhang, Hsi-Wei Yen, and Jun Hashimoto for a useful discussion. Based on observations collected at the European Southern Observatory under ESO programme 099.C-0601(A). The IRDIS H-band FITS product used in this work was obtained from the CDS /VizieR catalogue J/A+A/648 /A110. This paper makes use of the following ALMA data: ADS /JAO.ALMA#2015.1.00614.S. ALMA is a partner-ship of ESO (representing its member states), NSF (USA) and NINS (Japan), together with NRC (Canada), NSTC and ASIAA (Taiwan), and KASI (Republic of Korea), in cooperation with the Republic of Chile. The Joint ALMA Observatory is operated by ESO, AUI /NRAO and NAOJ. We thank the sta ff of the East Asian ALMA Regional Center for preparing and providing the calibrated measurement sets used in this study. Data analysis was in part carried out on the Multi-wavelength Data Analysis System oper-ated by the Astronomy Data Center (ADC), National Astronomical Observatory of Japan. 

References   

> Arakawa, S., Okuzumi, S., Tatsuuma, M., et al. 2023, ApJL, 951, L16, Arun, R., Mathew, B., Manoj, P., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 159, Avenhaus, H., Quanz, S. P., Schmid, H. M., et al. 2014, ApJ, 781, 87, —. 2017, AJ, 154, 33, Bae, J., Isella, A., Zhu, Z., et al. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Astronomical Society of the Pacific Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 19

Conference Series, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 423 Bae, J., Teague, R., & Zhu, Z. 2021, ApJ, 912, 56, Baehr, H., & Klahr, H. 2015, ApJ, 814, 155, Baehr, H., & Zhu, Z. 2021a, ApJ, 909, 135, —. 2021b, ApJ, 909, 136, Barranco, J. A., Pei, S., & Marcus, P. S. 2018, ApJ, 869, 127, Bate, M. R. 2018, MNRAS, 475, 5618, Benisty, M., Stolker, T., Pohl, A., et al. 2017, A&A, 597, A42, Benisty, M., Juhász, A., Facchini, S., et al. 2018, A&A, 619, A171, Birnstiel, T., Dullemond, C. P., & Brauer, F. 2009, A&A, 503, L5, —. 2010, A&A, 513, A79, Birnstiel, T., Klahr, H., & Ercolano, B. 2012, A&A, 539, A148, Birnstiel, T., Ormel, C. W., & Dullemond, C. P. 2011, A&A, 525, A11, Birnstiel, T., Dullemond, C. P., Zhu, Z., et al. 2018, ApJL, 869, L45, Bohn, A. J., Benisty, M., Perraut, K., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A183, Booth, R. A., & Clarke, C. J. 2016, MNRAS, 458, 2676, Bouvier, J., Chelli, A., Allain, S., et al. 1999, A&A, 349, 619 Brauer, F., Dullemond, C. P., & Henning, T. 2008, A&A, 480, 859, Burke, J. R., & Hollenbach, D. J. 1983, ApJ, 265, 223, Canovas, H., Ménard, F., de Boer, J., et al. 2015, A&A, 582, L7, Carrasco-González, C., Sierra, A., Flock, M., et al. 2019, ApJ, 883, 71, CASA Team, Bean, B., Bhatnagar, S., et al. 2022, PASP, 134, 114501, Casassus, S., Wright, C. M., Marino, S., et al. 2015, ApJ, 812, 126, Casassus, S., Avenhaus, H., Pérez, S., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 477, 5104, Cossins, P., Lodato, G., & Clarke, C. J. 2009, MNRAS, 393, 1157, Cuello, N., Montesinos, M., Stammler, S. M., Louvet, F., & Cuadra, J. 2019, A&A, 622, A43, Delussu, L., Birnstiel, T., Miotello, A., et al. 2024, A&A, 688, A81, Dominik, C., & Dullemond, C. P. 2024, A&A, 682, A144, Dominik, C., Min, M., & Tazaki, R. 2021, OpTool: Command-line driven tool for creating complex dust opacities, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2104.010 Draine, B. T. 2003, ApJ, 598, 1026, Dr ˛ a˙ zkowska, J., Bitsch, B., Lambrechts, M., et al. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 717, Dubrulle, B., Morfill, G., & Sterzik, M. 1995, ICARUS, 114, 237, Dullemond, C. P., & Dominik, C. 2005, A&A, 434, 971, Dullemond, C. P., Ziampras, A., Ostertag, D., & Dominik, C. 2022, A&A, 668, A105, Facchini, S., Juhász, A., & Lodato, G. 2018, MNRAS, 473, 4459, Flock, M., Turner, N. J., Nelson, R. P., et al. 2020, ApJ, 897, 155, Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., & Goodman, J. 2013, PASP, 125, 306, Francis, L., & van der Marel, N. 2020, ApJ, 892, 111, Fritscher, M., & Teiser, J. 2021, ApJ, 923, 134, Fukagawa, M., Tsukagoshi, T., Momose, M., et al. 2013, PASJ, 65, L14, Fukuhara, Y., Flock, M., Okuzumi, S., & Tominaga, R. T. 2025, A&A, 701, A72, Fukuhara, Y., & Okuzumi, S. 2024, PASJ, 76, 708, Fukuhara, Y., Okuzumi, S., & Ono, T. 2021, ApJ, 914, 132, —. 2023, PASJ, 75, 233, Fung, J., & Ono, T. 2021, ApJ, 922, 13, Gaia Collaboration, Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G. A., et al. 2023, A&A, 674, A1, Gammie, C. F. 2001, ApJ, 553, 174, Goldreich, P., & Ward, W. R. 1973, ApJ, 183, 1051, Gundlach, B., Schmidt, K. P., Kreuzig, C., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 1273, Hammond, I., Christiaens, V., Price, D. J., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 6109, Hashimoto, J., Dong, R., Muto, T., Liu, H. B., & Terada, Y. 2024, AJ, 167, 75, Hunziker, S., Schmid, H. M., Ma, J., et al. 2021, A&A, 648, A110, Kataoka, A., Tsukagoshi, T., Momose, M., et al. 2016, ApJL, 831, L12, Kothe, S., Blum, J., Weidling, R., & Güttler, C. 2013, ICARUS, 225, 75, Kratter, K., & Lodato, G. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 271, Ku ff meier, M., Dullemond, C. P., Reissl, S., & Goicovic, F. G. 2021, A&A, 656, A161, Leedham, C. S., Booth, R. A., & Clarke, C. J. 2025, MNRAS, 539, 2780, Les, R., & Lin, M.-K. 2015, MNRAS, 450, 1503, Lesur, G., Latter, H., & Ogilvie, G. I. 2025, A&A, 703, A225, Lesur, G., Flock, M., Ercolano, B., et al. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 465 Lim, J., Simon, J. B., Li, R., et al. 2026, ApJ, 1000, 156, —. 2025, ApJ, 981, 160, Lin, M.-K., & Youdin, A. N. 2015, ApJ, 811, 17, Longarini, C., Lodato, G., Toci, C., et al. 2021, ApJL, 920, L41, Malygin, M. G., Klahr, H., Semenov, D., Henning, T., & Dullemond, C. P. 2017, A&A, 605, A30, Manger, N., Pfeil, T., & Klahr, H. 2021, MNRAS, 508, 5402, Marino, S., Perez, S., & Casassus, S. 2015, ApJL, 798, L44, Matsakos, T., & Königl, A. 2017, AJ, 153, 60, Mayama, S., Hashimoto, J., Muto, T., et al. 2012, ApJL, 760, L26, Mayama, S., Akiyama, E., Pani´ c, O., et al. 2018, ApJL, 868, L3, Mejía, A. C., Durisen, R. H., Pickett, M. K., & Cai, K. 2005, ApJ, 619, 1098, Miranda, R., & Rafikov, R. R. 2020a, ApJ, 892, 65, —. 2020b, ApJ, 904, 121, Montesinos, M., Perez, S., Casassus, S., et al. 2016, ApJL, 823, L8, Mullin, C., Lucas, M., Dong, R., et al. 2026, AJ, 171, 241, Musiolik, G., & Wurm, G. 2019, ApJ, 873, 58, Nealon, R., Cuello, N., & Alexander, R. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 4108, Nealon, R., Dipierro, G., Alexander, R., Martin, R. G., & Nixon, C. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 20, Nelson, R. P., Gressel, O., & Umurhan, O. M. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 2610, Nowak, M., Rowther, S., Lacour, S., et al. 2024, A&A, 683, A6, Ohashi, S., Muto, T., Tsukamoto, Y., et al. 2025, Nature Astronomy, Ohashi, S., Kataoka, A., Nagai, H., et al. 2018, ApJ, 864, 81, Orihara, R., & Momose, M. 2025, ApJ, 986, 215, Ormel, C. W., & Cuzzi, J. N. 2007, A&A, 466, 413, Oshiro, H., Tatsuuma, M., Okuzumi, S., & Tanaka, H. 2025, ApJ, 983, 75, Owen, J. E., & Lai, D. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 2834, Perez, S., Casassus, S., Ménard, F., et al. 2015, ApJ, 798, 85, Pfeil, T., Birnstiel, T., & Klahr, H. 2023, ApJ, 959, 121, —. 2024, A&A, 687, L5, Pfeil, T., & Klahr, H. 2019, ApJ, 871, 150, Pinilla, P., Birnstiel, T., Ricci, L., et al. 2012, A&A, 538, A114, Pinilla, P., Benisty, M., de Boer, J., et al. 2018, ApJ, 868, 85, Raettig, N., Lyra, W., & Klahr, H. 2013, ApJ, 765, 115, Ricci, L., Testi, L., Natta, A., et al. 2010, A&A, 512, A15, Rometsch, T., Ziampras, A., Kley, W., & Béthune, W. 2021, A&A, 656, A130, Shari ff , K., & Umurhan, O. M. 2024, ApJ, 977, 272, Shi, J.-M., & Chiang, E. 2014, ApJ, 789, 34, Shi, J.-M., Zhu, Z., Stone, J. M., & Chiang, E. 2016, MNRAS, 459, 982, Sierra, A., & Lizano, S. 2020, ApJ, 892, 136, Sierra, A., Pérez, L. M., Sotomayor, B., et al. 2024, ApJ, 974, 306, Soon, K.-L., Momose, M., Muto, T., et al. 2019, PASJ, 71, 124, Stoll, M. H. R., & Kley, W. 2014, A&A, 572, A77, —. 2016, A&A, 594, A57, Su, Z., & Bai, X.-N. 2024, ApJ, 975, 126, Su, Z., & Wei, X. 2025, ApJ, 983, 89, Takahashi, S. Z., Tsukamoto, Y., & Inutsuka, S. 2016, MNRAS, 458, 3597, Takeuchi, T., & Lin, D. N. C. 2002, ApJ, 581, 1344, Tarczay-Nehéz, D., Regály, Z., & Vorobyov, E. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 3014, Tazaki, R., Murakawa, K., Muto, T., Honda, M., & Inoue, A. K. 2021, ApJ, 921, 173, Teague, R., Bae, J., Benisty, M., et al. 2022, ApJ, 930, 144, Temmink, M., Booth, A. S., van der Marel, N., & van Dishoeck, E. F. 2023, A&A, 675, A131, Urpin, V. 2003, A&A, 404, 397, Uyama, T., Muto, T., Mawet, D., et al. 2020, AJ, 159, 118, van der Marel, N. 2023, European Physical Journal Plus, 138, 225, Warren, S. G., & Brandt, R. E. 2008, Journal of Geophysical Research (Atmospheres), 113, D14220, Wölfer, L., Facchini, S., Kurtovic, N. T., et al. 2021, A&A, 648, A19, Whipple, F. L. 1972, in From Plasma to Planet, ed. A. Elvius, 211 Woitke, P., Min, M., Pinte, C., et al. 2016, A&A, 586, A103, 20 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 

> Yen, H.-W., & Gu, P.-G. 2020, ApJ, 905, 89, Youdin, A. N., & Goodman, J. 2005, ApJ, 620, 459, Youdin, A. N., & Lithwick, Y. 2007, ICARUS, 192, 588, Zhang, M., Huang, P., & Dong, R. 2024, ApJ, 961, 86, Zhang, S., & Zhu, Z. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 2287, —. 2024, ApJL, 974, L38, Zhang, S., Zhu, Z., & Fairbairn, C. W. 2025, ApJL, 995, L33, Zhu, Z. 2019, MNRAS, 483, 4221, Zhu, Z., Zhang, S., & Johnson, T. M. 2025, ApJ, 980, 259, Ziampras, A., Dullemond, C. P., Birnstiel, T., Benisty, M., & Nelson, R. P. 2025, MNRAS, 540, 1185, Zormpas, A., Birnstiel, T., Rosotti, G. P., & Andrews, S. M. 2022, A&A, 661, A66, Zubko, V. G., Mennella, V., Colangeli, L., & Bussoletti, E. 1996, MNRAS, 282, 1321,

Appendix 1 Input images and gradient maps for the shadow reconstruction 

Figure 14 shows the images and gradient maps used to define the fitting data for the shadow-geometry reconstruction. The H-band 

Qϕ image traces the polarized scattered light from the disk surface, while the corresponding Uϕ image is used to assess residual noise and possible non-azimuthal polarization signals. We construct the S/N map as Qϕ/Uϕ, rms (r), where Uϕ, rms (r) is the radial rms profile measured from the Uϕ image. An inverse hyperbolic sine stretch is applied to these images for visualization and, in the case of the S/N map, for the subsequent gradient-based feature extraction. The geometric features used in the fitting are identified from the gradients of the asinh-stretched S /N map. The shadow-boundary points are sampled from pixels with large azimuthal gradients, 

∇S/N · ˆeϕ, because the shadows appear as localized changes in brightness along the azimuthal direction. The horizon-curve points are sampled from pixels with large positive radial gradients, ∇S/N·

ˆer > 0, whereas the apparent outer-edge points are sampled from pixels with large negative radial gradients, ∇S/N · ˆer < 0. The sam-pled points shown in figure 14 are used as the fitting data for the simultaneous modeling of the horizon curve, shadow boundaries, and apparent outer-edge curve. 

Appendix 2 Posterior distributions of the shadow-geometry model 

Figure 15 shows the posterior distributions of the disk model pa-rameters obtained from the MCMC fitting of the shadow-geometry model. We explored the posterior distributions using the a ffi ne-invariant ensemble sampler implemented in emcee , with 36 walk-ers evolved for 20,000 steps. The first 10,000 steps were discarded as burn-in, and the posterior distributions shown here were con-structed from the remaining samples from all walkers. The fitted data points were sampled from high-gradient pixels correspond-ing to the horizon curve, shadow boundaries, and apparent outer-edge curve, as described in subsection 2.2.2. The diagonal pan-els show the marginalized one-dimensional posterior distributions, while the o ff -diagonal panels show the two-dimensional posterior distributions and correlations between parameters. The orange solid lines indicate the median values of the poste-rior distributions, and the dashed lines indicate the 16th and 84th percentiles. These percentile ranges are adopted as the statistical uncertainties listed in table 2. The blue solid lines indicate the best-fit parameter values used to draw the model curves in figure 14. For most parameters, the best-fit values are consistent with the poste-rior medians within the quoted uncertainties, indicating that the adopted best-fit model lies within a high-probability region of the posterior distribution. Some parameter correlations are visible in the two-dimensional posterior distributions. In particular, parameters related to the vertical structure and radial extent of the scattering surface are partially correlated, reflecting the fact that the observed horizon, shadow boundaries, and apparent outer edge jointly constrain the projected shape of the disk surface. Nevertheless, the posterior dis-tributions are well localized within the adopted search ranges, and the resulting uncertainties are su ffi ciently small for the subsequent temperature analysis. 

Appendix 3 Dust absorption and scattering opacities 

In sections 2 and 4, we use the opacity model based on Ricci et al. (2010) as the fiducial model to evaluate the disk tempera-ture [equation (4)], the emission height [equations (22) and (23)], and the cooling timescale (subsection 2.1.6). To calculate the frequency-dependent e ff ective dust extinction opacity per dust mass κd,ν for a given dust grain size, we use the absorption opac-ity κabs ,ν , the scattering opacity κsca ,ν , and the asymmetry param-eter gν, as described in subsection 2.1.4. Figure 16 shows κabs ,ν ,

κsca ,eff ,ν (= [1 − gν]κsca ,ν ), and gν as a function of the dust grain size 

a with ν = 697 GHz for the fiducial model. In this frequency, both 

κabs ,ν and κsca ,eff ,ν have a peak at the dust grain with ≈ 100 μm, where the size parameter ( = 2πa/λ ) takes the value of almost unity. These dust opacities can also depend on the structure of the dust particles. In section 4.2, we treat the dust filling factor fdust as a parameter on which the dust opacity depends. Figure 16 also plots κabs ,ν , κsca ,eff ,ν , and gν for di ff erent values of fdust . As fdust de-creases, the peak value of κabs ,ν at a ∼ 100 μm decreases, while κabs ,ν 

at smaller and larger dust than 100 μm decreases and increases, re-spectively. For κsca ,eff ,ν , the porous dust leads to a peak value lower than that of the compact dust. Furthermore, the composition of dust particles can a ff ect the dust extinction opacity and thereby the estimate of the dust grain size. For instance, the DIANA (Woitke et al. 2016) and DSHARP (Birnstiel et al. 2018) opacity models assume a di ff erent compo-sition from the model based on Ricci et al. (2010), leading to a di ff erent value of the opacities. Figure 16 plots κabs ,ν , κsca ,eff ,ν , and 

gν for the Ricci, DIANA, and DSHARP opacity models as a func-tion of the dust grain size. For the DIANA and DSHARP models, 

κabs ,ν at the dust of a ≲ 100 μm becomes smaller compared to the Ricci opacity, while κsca ,eff ,ν takes almost the same values as the Ricci opacity. We present the results of the grain size estimation for the DIANA and DSHARP models in appendix 6. 

Appendix 4 Disk temperature and gas scale height 

In section 4.2, we derive the disk temperature from the vertical ex-tinction optical thickness at ALMA Band 9 with a given dust grain size and the observed intensity of the dust thermal emission. The left and middle panels of figure 17 show the vertical extinction op-tical thickness at ν = 697 GHz, τall , and disk temperature T as a function of the dust maximum grain size amax . This figure indi-cates that in the cases of Σdust = 1 g cm −2 and 10 g cm −2, τall for all maximum grain sizes exceed unity. This shows that the north Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 21 (a)

# (d) (e) (f)( + ) ( − )∇SN ⋅̂ er

SN = sinh −1

(Qϕ /Uϕ rms )

# ∇SN ⋅̂ er∇SN ⋅̂ eϕ

# (b) (c)sinh −1 Qϕ sinh −1 Uϕ  

> Fig. 14. Images and gradient maps used for the shadow-geometry reconstruction. (a) Inverse-hyperbolic-sine-stretched H-band

Qϕ image. (b) Inverse-hyperbolic-sine-stretched H-band Uϕ image. (c) Inverse-hyperbolic-sine-stretched S/N map, defined as sinh −1(Qϕ/Uϕ, rms ), overlaid with the best-fit model curves. The green, red, and blue curves indicate the horizon curve, shadow boundaries, and apparent outer edge of the outer disk, respectively. The green cross and red star mark the positions of the outer-disk center and the central star, respectively. (d) Azimuthal gradient component of the S/N map, ∇S/N · ˆeϕ, used to identify the shadow boundaries. (e) Positive radial gradient component, ∇S/N · ˆer > 0, used to identify the horizon curve. (f) Negative radial gradient component, ∇S/N · ˆer < 0, used to identify the apparent outer-edge curve. The colored circles in panels (d)–(f) show the sampled data points used in the simultaneous fitting. 

region of the HD 142527 disk is almost optically thick at ALMA Band 9 for the fiducial model. For the case of Σdust = 0.1 g cm −2,the dust with amax ≲ 2 mm leads to larger τall than unity. From τall and the observed dust thermal emission intensity Iν, obs ,we obtain T using equation (4). The middle panel of this figure shows that for the case of Σdust = 10 g cm −2, the temperature rises slightly as amax increases up to ≈ 100 μm, and remains nearly con-stant at T ≈ 35 K for sizes larger than that. This is due to the scattering e ff ect, which corresponds to the third term on the right-hand side of equation (4). For the cases of the low dust surface density, T increases sharply to 50 K at most as τall approaches unity. This temperature range is also consistent with an estimate from molecular line emission observations of 13 C18 O and DCO +

at the midplane of the north point (Temmink et al. 2023). The dependence of T on the dust grain size determines that on the gas scale height. We present Hgas in the right panel of figure 17 as a function of maximum dust grain size amax . The gas scale height takes approximately 17 au for almost all cases and varies from 16 au to 20 au depending on changes in T .The disk temperature also determines the occurrence of the gravitational instability. The gravitational instability operates when Toomre’s QT parameter, defined by QT = csΩK/π GΣgas ,is smaller than approximately two. The middle panel of figure 17 shows that the minimum value of the disk temperature ap-proximates to 32 .5 K with Σgas = 10 g cm −2, yielding QT ≈ 2.3. Therefore, our model predicts that the outer disk of HD 142527 is stable for the gravitational instability. Furthermore, τall and T depend on the size distribution, dust filling factor, and the opacity models. Figure 18 shows τall (up-per row) and T (lower row) for di ff erent models as a function of dust grain size. Changes in these parameters a ff ect τall , but the magnitude of those changes remains within one order of magni-tude of the fiducial model for each dust grain size. Therefore, T is insensitive to fluctuations in these parameters, with the maximum variation limited to a factor of 1.3. 22 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 −19 .63 +0 .306 

> −0.295

[au] 

> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5
> coy

1.73 +0 .255 

> −0.258

[au] 

> 144.8
> 145.6
> 146.4
> 147.2
> 148.0
> Re

146 .75 +0 .429 

> −0.429

[au] 

> 84
> 88
> 92
> 96
> Hsurf , c

88 .18 +2 .161 

> −2.067

[au] 

> 189.0
> 190.5
> 192.0
> 193.5
> Rout

191 .18 +0 .731 

> −0.679

[au] 

> 3.2
> 3.6
> 4.0
> 4.4
> 4.8
> q

3.92 +0 .205 

> −0.209
> 32
> 34
> 36
> ii

34 .11 +0 .924 

> −0.912

[ ◦ ]

> 178.2
> 178.8
> 179.4
> 180.0
> 180.6
> PA i

179 .35 +0 .379 

> −0.338

[ ◦ ]

> 20.5
> 20.0
> 19.5
> 19.0

cox

> 0.156
> 0.162
> 0.168
> 0.174
> hr
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> 2.5

coy

> 144.8
> 145.6
> 146.4
> 147.2
> 148.0

Re

> 84
> 88
> 92
> 96

Hsurf , c

> 189.0
> 190.5
> 192.0
> 193.5

Rout 

> 3.2
> 3.6
> 4.0
> 4.4
> 4.8

q

> 32
> 34
> 36

ii

> 178.2
> 178.8
> 179.4
> 180.0
> 180.6

PA i

> 0.156
> 0.162
> 0.168
> 0.174

hr

0.16 +0 .003 

> −0.003

Fig. 15. Posterior distributions of the disk model parameters listed in Table 2. The distributions were obtained from the MCMC fitting of the horizon curve, shadow boundaries, and apparent outer-edge curve for the HD 142527 disk. The diagonal panels show the marginalized one-dimensional posterior distributions, while the off-diagonal panels show the two-dimensional posterior distributions and parameter correlations. The orange solid lines indicate the median values of the posterior distributions, whereas the blue solid lines indicate the maximum-likelihood values adopted for the best-fit model. The dashed lines indicate the 16th and 84th percentiles. The parameter values and uncertainties quoted above the one-dimensional histograms correspond to the median and the 16th–84th percentile ranges, respectively. 

Appendix 5 Parameter dependence on calculated ALMA Band 9 emission height 

In section 4.2, we display the cooling timescale at the ALMA Band 9 emission height, tcool ,cal , to see the dependence of the gas surface density (figure 9), size distribution (figure 10), and dust filling fac-tor (figure 11). These parameters a ff ect the ALMA Band 9 emis-sion height zemi through the optical depth as well as the vertical distribution of the cooling timescale. Figure 19 shows zemi for all models presented in this study, as a function of dust grain size with Σdust = 10 g cm −2. The left panel of this figure shows that a decrease in the gas surface density Σgas 

results in an overall lower zemi than that of the fiducial model pre-sented in figure 6. The dust amount at high altitudes, as well as the Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 23 10 5 10 4 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0 10 1 10 2                             

> a[cm]
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> abs , ν  [cm 2 g−1] at ALMA Band 9
> dust absorption opacity
> Fiducial
> Mid-Fill
> Low-Fill
> DIANA
> DSHARP
> 10 510 410 310 210 110 010 110 2
> a[cm]
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> sca , eff , ν  [cm 2 g−1] at ALMA Band 9
> effective dust scattering opacity
> 10 510 410 310 210 110 010 110 2
> a[cm]
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> gν at ALMA Band 9
> asymmetry parameter

Fig. 16. Dust absorption opacity (left panel), effective dust scattering opacity (middle panel), and asymmetry parameter (right panel) for different opacity models and porosity models as a function of the dust grain size with the frequency of ν = 697 GHz .10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0                       

> amax [cm]
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> τall
> τall =μ
> vertical extinction optical thickness at ALMA Band 9
> Σdust = 0 .1 g cm −2
> Σdust = 1 g cm −2
> Σdust = 10 g cm −2
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> T [K]
> disk temperature
> 10 310 210 110 0
> amax [cm]
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> 20
> 25
> Hgas  [au]  Hgas /R = 0 .1
> Hgas /R = 0 .05
> gas scale height

Fig. 17. Calculated disk’s vertical extinction optical thickness at ALMA Band 9 (left panel), disk temperature (middle panel), and gas scale height (right panel) as a function of the maximum dust grain size for different values of Σdust in the fiducial model. The horizontal dotted line in the left panel shows τall = μ. The horizontal dashed and dotted lines in the right panel show Hgas /R = 0.1 and 0.05 , respectively. 

dust scale height, decreases because a decrease in Σgas increases the Stokes number of the dust [see equation (13)]. Therefore, the ALMA Band 9 optical depth measured from infinity down, τν(z), in equation (22) becomes small at high altitudes, yielding the low 

zemi .For the di ff erence in the size distribution, zemi is also changed through the dust number density and optical depth at ALMA Band 9. The variation in zemi with respect to the size distribution models reflects the dependence of the e ff ective dust extinction opacity on the dust grain size. For the Single-Size model, the profile of zemi 

has a peak at a1 ∼ 100 μm, which corresponds to a peak of the dust absorption and scattering opacities (see figure 16 in appendix 3). As the dust grain size increases, zemi for the Single-Size model decreases to values smaller than those for the fiducial model. For the Steep-SizDis model, zemi is higher than that for the fiducial model due to an increased abundance of small dust particles with high opacity. However, a change in the minimum dust grain size has only a minor e ff ect on zemi . This is because the dust particles smaller than 1 μm possess a constant opacity. Furthermore, for porous dust, zemi is almost the same as that of compact dust, especially in the case of amax ≲ 100 μm with 

Σdust = 10 g cm −2. For a case of amax ≳ 100 μm, zemi is slightly higher than that of the fiducial model due to the large opacity. We note, however, for a case of amax ≲ 100 μm with low Σdust , zemi de-creases as the filling factor decreases because the absorption opac-ity decreases (see figure 16 in appendix 3). Moreover, di ff erent opacity models cause a change in zemi . The right panel of figure 19 shows zemi for di ff erent opacity models (for details of the opacity model, see appendix 3). For the DIANA and DSHARP models, zemi is slightly lower than that of the fiducial model, which uses the Ricci opacity model. This is due to the low absorption opacity at a ≲ 100 μm, as shown in figure 16 in appendix 3. These slightly low zemi have a minor impact on tcool ,cal 

(see appendix 6). 

Appendix 6 Dependence on the opacity model 

As mentioned in appendix 3, the dust extinction opacity controls disk temperature, the emission height at ALMA Band 9, and the cooling timescale. In this appendix, we explain the results for cases of di ff erent opacity models, the DIANA (Woitke et al. 2016) and DSHARP (Birnstiel et al. 2018) opacity models. The ab-sorption opacity κabs ,ν , the e ff ective scattering opacity κsca ,ν , and the asymmetry parameter gν as functions of the dust grain size for both models are shown in figure 16 in appendix 3. For the DIANA and DSHARP models, we reset the dust material density to ρm = 2.08 g cm −3 and 1 .68 g cm −3, respectively. We show in figure 20 the cooling timescale at the ALMA Band 9 emission height, tcool ,cal , as a function of amax and Σdust for the DIANA (upper panel) and DSHARP (lower panel) models. For 24 Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

a1, a max [cm] 

10 1

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

> τall

τall = μ

> Fiducial
> Small-amin
> Steep-SizeDis
> Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin
> Single-Size

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

τall = μ

vertical extinction optical thickness at ALMA Band 9 

> Fiducial
> Mid-Fill
> Low-Fill

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

τall = μ

> Fiducial
> DIANA
> DSHARP

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

a1, a max [cm] 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

> T [K]

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

disk temperature 

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

0

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

Fig. 18. Upper row: Same as the left of figure 17, but for the different models of the size distribution (left panel), porosity (middle panel), and opacity (right panel), with Σdust = 10 g cm −2. The horizontal dotted lines show τall = μ. Lower row: Same as the middle panel of figure 17, but for the different models of the size distribution (left panel), porosity (middle panel), and opacity (right panel), with Σdust = 10 g cm −2.10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0       

> zemi /H gas
> Fiducial
> Low-Gas: Σdust = 10 g cm −2
> Low-Gas: Σdust = 1 g cm −2
> Low-Gas: Σdust = 0 .1 g cm −2

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

a1, a max [cm] 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

> Fiducial
> Small-amin
> Steep-SizeDis
> Steep-SizeDis-Small-amin
> Single-Size

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 

calculated ALMA Band 9 emission height 

> Fiducial
> Mid-Fill
> Low-Fill

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

0.0 

0.5 

1.0 

1.5 

2.0 

2.5 

3.0 Fiducial 

> DIANA
> DSHARP

Fig. 19. Same as figure 6, but for the different models of the Low-Gas, size distribution, porosity, and opacity from left to right, with Σdust = 10 g cm −2 except for the Low-Gas model. 

both models, tcool ,cal increases slightly compared to that for the fiducial model, as shown in figure 8. This is because a low ab-sorption opacity with a ≲ 100 μm (see the left panel of figure 16) leads to a high emission height at ALMA Band 9 (see the right panel of figure 19). The constrained maximum dust grain size with Σdust = 10 g cm −2 becomes 200 μm ≲ amax ≲ 1.0 mm and 250 μm ≲ amax ≲ 1.5 mm for the DIANA and DSHARP models, respectively. According to section 5, we also compute the thickness of the VSI-active layers and search the parameter space satisfying the cooling and global VSI conditions. Figure 21 maps the amax –Σdust 

parameter space that satisfies the cooling and global VSI condi-tions for the DIANA (upper panel) and DSHARP (lower panel) models. As with tcool ,cal , variations in the opacity models slightly alter the amax –Σdust parameter space that satisfies the cooling and global VSI conditions. The maximum dust grain size reproducing Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan (2026), Vol. 00, No. 0 25   

> Fig. 20. Same as figure 8, but for the DIANA model (upper panel) and DSHARP model (lower panel).

0.1 < tcool ,cal ΩK < 0.4 and αz = 2 × 10 −3 with Σdust = 10 g cm −2

becomes 200 μm ≲ amax ≲ 600 μm and 250 μm ≲ amax ≲ 730 μmfor the DIANA and DSHARP models, respectively. For both mod-els, there is also no maximum grain size satisfying the cooling and global VSI condition at Σdust ≲ 0.3 g cm −2.As a result, we conclude that di ff erences in the opacity models or dust material components have little e ff ect on the results of the grain-size limitation. 10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

10 1

10 0

10 1

> Σdust  [g cm −2]

DIANA 

10 3 10 2 10 1 10 0

amax [cm] 

10 1

10 0

10 1

> Σdust  [g cm −2]

DSHARP