Title: Plato benchmark stars I. The initial benchmark sample

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.02956v1

Published Time: Mon, 05 Oct 2026 00:49:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. plato_bms ©ESO 2026 October 5, 2026 

# Plato benchmark stars 

# I. The initial benchmark sample 

T. Merle 1, 2, P. F. L. Maxted 3, O. L. Creevey 4, U. Heiter 5, D.B. Palakkatharappil 6, K. G. Hełminiak 8,C. C. Aguilera Gómez 19 , M. Bazot 13 , S. Cassisi 17 , 18 , N. Ebrahimkutty 4, R. E. Giribaldi 10 , P. Jofré 14 , F. Kiefer 12 , M. N. Lund 7, N. Miller 5, T. Morel 11 , D. Mourard 4, N. Nardetto 4, J.-D. do Nascimento, Jr. 20 , T. Olander 5, G. N. Pawar 8,A. Rebassa-Mansergas 15 , 16 , R. Raddi 15 , B. Rojas-Ayala 9, J. Southworth 3

(A ffi liations can be found after the references) 

Received; accepted 

ABSTRACT 

Context. The ESA P lato mission aims to detect and characterise Earth-size exoplanets orbiting bright, late-type stars through high-precision photometry and asteroseismology. Precise and accurate stellar parameters of host stars are essential for reliable exoplanet characterization and benchmarking of stellar models. 

Aims. This work defines a comprehensive sample of P lato benchmark stars with well-determined fundamental and atmospheric properties that satisfy stringent precision requirements to support mission pre-operation, operation, and post-operation phases. 

Methods. We prepared a catalogue of benchmark stars by compiling data from diverse sources, including eclipsing and spectroscopic binaries, interferometric angular diameters, asteroseismic measurements, and large spectroscopic and photometric surveys. Fundamental and atmospheric stellar properties (mass, radius, luminosity, age, e ff ective temperature, gravity, density and limb darkening) were assigned benchmark levels reflecting their degree of model dependence. We also provide ancillary parameters like parallax, metallicity, bolometric flux, angular diameter, extinction, rotational period; and X-ray fluxes (the latter uniquely for M dwarfs). Parallax data were homogenized and when Gaia DR3 parallaxes are used, we systematically took into account the parallax bias. Multiple independent measurements were reconciled to produce a coherent and robust set of stellar properties adhering to the P lato mission’s precision and accuracy requirements. 

Results. The P lato benchmark catalogue contains 1090 FGKM main-sequence and subgiant stars, divided into three quality tiers based on model-independent (B1) parameters: gold (15 stars with B1 mass, radius, and luminosity), silver (195 with B1 mass and radius), and bronze (416 with at least one B1 property). The remaining stars lack B1 parameters but feature well-characterised model-dependent (B2) or empirical (B3) properties, expanding the parameter space for model validation. The stars are well-distributed in sky position and brightness, making them optimally suited for testing and calibration of P lato pipelines and data. Aprroximately 40% of the stars in the catalogue lie within the P lato fields of view. The catalogue provides homogenized stellar parameters with rigorous uncertainty estimates, enabling validation of P lato data processing pipelines, empirical testing of stellar evolutionary and asteroseismic models, and cross-survey calibration. 

Conclusions. This P lato benchmark star sample (PBS) constitutes the largest catalogue of benchmark stars to date and a fundamental resource anchoring P lato ’s scientific goals in exoplanet and stellar astrophysics. By providing rigorously vetted benchmark stars, the mission ensures accurate planetary parameter determinations and advances our understanding of stellar structure and evolution. The catalogue is available online at https://astro.ulb.ac.be/pbs and will be updated regularly, o ff ering long-term value to the P lato project and the broader astronomical community. 

Key words. standards – catalogs – stars: fundamental parameters – stars: late-type – stars: binaries: general – stars: low-mass 

1. Introduction 

The ESA P lato mission (PLAnetary Transits and Oscillation of stars, Rauer et al. 2014, 2025) is scheduled to be launched in January 2027. It is designed to detect and characterise large num-bers of planets orbiting nearby stars, including Earth-size planets orbiting in the habitable zone of Sun-like stars. Mean densities and ages will be determined for the terrestrial planets. The exo-planet densities will be computed using radii obtained from the Plato transit light-curves and masses from ground-based radial velocity follow-up observations. Masses, radii and ages of FGK-type host stars will be characterised by asteroseismic analyses of the P lato photometric light-curves ( e.g. Goupil et al. 2024). The properties of all types of host stars, including M dwarfs, will be determined from ground-based preparatory, archival, and follow-up observations. P lato ’s unique capability of asteroseismic anal-ysis and systematic observation of bright solar-type and M-dwarf stars will enable unprecedented precision in stellar parameters for thousands of stars hosting terrestrial exoplanets, fundamen-tally advancing our knowledge of planetary system architectures and stellar evolution. This justifies defining a sizeable P lato sample of benchmark stars (hereafter PBS) in a similar manner to that used for the 

Gaia benchmark stars (GBS v3, Soubiran et al. 2024), building upon Heiter et al. (2015). Such sample will serve as essential ref-erences for a variety of scientific cases and for the validation and calibration of analysis methods during all phases of the P lato 

mission, including pre-operation (PO), operation (OPE), and post-operation. The scientific motivation for assembling such a sample is anchored in the stringent requirements set by P lato for the precise and accurate determination of stellar masses, radii, luminosities, ages, e ff ective temperatures, surface gravities, and metallicities across a range of FGKM main-sequence and sub-giant stars. These high-fidelity benchmarks provide the founda-tion for: 

Article number, page 1 arXiv:2610.02956v1 [astro-ph.SR] 2 Oct 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms 

– Validation of automated pipelines: robust benchmark stars allow the testing and cross-calibration of pipelines for atmo-spheric parameter determination, asteroseismic modelling, and exoplanet transit analysis, ensuring that the extracted stellar parameters are reliable and consistent throughout the mission. 

– Cross-survey calibration: by anchoring P lato ’s results to a common set of well-characterised stars, it becomes possible to cross-calibrate with legacy surveys and ongoing ground-based spectroscopic and space-based photometric surveys, thus facilitating the homogenisation of stellar parameters on a community-wide scale. 

– Precise exoplanet characterisation: accurate benchmark stars are crucial for determining host star properties, which directly influence the inferred radii, densities, and ages of discovered exoplanets (e.g. Stassun et al. 2017, 2018); fun-damental steps for addressing key questions on planetary composition, formation, and habitability. 

– Stellar physics and evolution: the availability of stars with independently determined parameters serves as a critical testbed for stellar evolutionary models, empirical relations, and the exploration of physical processes across di ff erent evolutionary stages. Ultimately, such benchmark stars are es-sential for refining the next generation of stellar models re-quired by the P lato mission. While existing state-of-the-art compilations, such as the GBS series, provide invaluable reference standards, they are lim-ited in size and do not su ffi ciently cover the specific parameter space, brightness ranges, or M-dwarf demographics required to validate the automated pipelines of the P lato mission. This high-lights the critical need for a dedicated, homogeneous benchmark sample tailored specifically to P lato ’s core scientific specifica-tions. The WP125500 “Benchmark stars” work package was estab-lished in May 2018 to organise the compilation of fundamental stellar properties, guided by requirements from the leaders of the stellar science work packages (WP121–128). Over several years, members of WP125500 gathered extensive literature measure-ments. Distilling this heterogeneous compilation into a single, curated, high-quality database with one definitive entry per star represented a major validation and software development e ff ort. Furthermore, the PBS sample is an essential component of the mission’s science calibration and validation plan. The part of the PBS located in the P lato field-of-view (FOV) selected for the first two years of the mission (see Sect. 5.1) has already been included in the science calibration and validation subset of the Plato input catalogue (scvPIC, Zwintz et al. 2026). A represen-tative example includes the use of the PBS to refine asteroseis-mic scaling relations, improve the modelling of limb-darkening for transit fitting, and assess systematic errors in stellar radii that propagate to planetary studies. This paper presents the work compiling the P lato benchmark catalogue, and it is structured as follows: Sect. 2 introduces the definitions of the stellar properties to be assessed, as well as the ancillary parameters considered in this study. The compilation of input data sets is described in Sect. 3. In Sect. 4, we detail the methodology adopted to construct the P lato benchmark star catalogue. Finally, Sect. 5 presents the resulting catalogue and demonstrates its usage for various scientific applications. 

2. Stellar properties and parameters 

> 2.1. Definition of benchmark levels

A benchmark star is a star for which reliable measurements of the star’s properties are known. This implies that any possible sources of systematic errors in the measurements are well un-derstood and, if possible, removed; and that the precision of the property meets the specifications and requirements from the Plato stellar science work packages. With the goal of performing a quantitative assessment of the reliability of properties, we define three benchmark levels for each stellar property: B1, B2 and B3, as defined below. We note that these benchmark levels apply to the properties of the star separately, not to the star itself, e.g. a star may have a measure-ment of its mass at benchmark level B1, a radius measurement at benchmark level B2 and an age estimate at benchmark level B3. Note the distinction here between values with a B1 benchmark level that are “measurements” whereas values with a B2 or a B3 benchmark level are “estimates”. We note that this approach represents a di ff erent strategy compared to the GBS (Soubiran et al. 2024), which strictly re-quired B1-level parameters across the board to validate auto-mated pipelines. The PBS sample in turn tracks eight parameters independently per star, allowing this flexibility to accommodate a large, diverse sample while maintaining rigorous pipeline val-idation standards.  

> Benchmark level B1 – Model-independent properties.

A di-rect, accurate and precise measurement of a star’s fundamen-tal property with negligible model dependence or coming from first principles. It can be summarised as: “the set of the model assumptions is well defined” . For instance, the mass of a star coming from the orbital dynamics in a visual and double-lined spectroscopic binary is B1.  

> Benchmark level B2 – Model-dependent properties.

A prop-erty inferred using stellar models or other theoretical inputs where the level of systematic errors due to the model dependence is well understood. It can be summarised as: “the set of the model assumptions is loosely defined” . For instance, the mass of a star is B2 if (i) the star belongs to a cluster and its mass is fitted on the cluster isochrone either using magnitude and colour or lu-minosity and e ff ective temperature; or (ii) if the stellar mass is inferred from an asteroseismic modelling analysis. 

> Benchmark level B3 – properties from empirical relations.

Assigned when the stellar property is obtained from a phe-nomenological relation using a mathematical functional form to relate various parameters. It can be summarised as: “the model is empirical” . For instance, the mass of a star is B3 if the mass is coming from the mass-luminosity, mass-radius or other similar kind of empirical relations, which are precisely defined for main sequence stars, while discrepancies appear when the stars evolve out of the main sequence. 

> 2.2. Stellar properties

In this work, we assess eight key stellar properties for the P lato 

benchmark stars: (i) the stellar mass, M; (ii) the stellar radius, 

R; (iii) the stellar luminosity, L; (iv) the stellar age, τ; (v) the ef-fective temperature, Teff ; (vi) the surface gravity expressed as the decimal logarithm, log g; (vii) the mean stellar density expressed  

> Article number, page 2 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars

as the decimal logarithm, log ⟨ρ⟩; and (viii) the limb-darkening characterised by the parameters h′ 

> 1

and h′ 

> 2

defined below. Stel-lar properties are either sourced from the literature or calculated via the equations in Appendix A. The values of M, R, L and ⟨ρ⟩

are given in solar units using the nominal solar values given in Table B.1. Several ancillary parameters are included, such as the overall metallicity [Fe /H], but these are not assigned benchmark levels. 

> 2.2.1. The mass

Mass is the primary property that governs the evolution and ulti-mate fate of a star. In a recent comprehensive review on the de-termination of stellar masses, Serenelli et al. (2021) present the mass ladder in their Fig. 16 that gives the accuracy /precision as a function of methods used and mass ranges. We defined as B1 the mass from a star belonging to a binary system which is observed: (i) as a visual and spectroscopic bi-nary (e.g. Pourbaix & Bo ffi n 2016) or (ii) as a detached eclipsing and double-lined spectroscopic binary (e.g. Maxted et al. 2020). In case (i), the sum and ratio of the masses can be obtained from Newtonian dynamics, with the only assumption that the masses are point sources. In case (ii), the inclination of the orbit on the sky obtained from the eclipses allows one to obtain the individ-ual stellar masses from each mass function. While standard bi-nary orbit solutions often assume an isolated system with purely Keplerian motion, tertiary gravitational perturbations or light-travel time e ff ects can be explicitly incorporated when a third companion is present. A clear example is the eclipsing binary AI Phe, where three-body orbital e ff ects were accounted for in the spectroscopic analysis by Gallenne et al. (2019). A stellar mass is considered as B2 when stellar models are used: (i) from interpolation in stellar evolutionary tracks (e.g. Lebreton & Reese 2020), which is applicable to both cluster members and isolated field stars; (ii) from asteroseismic fre-quency fitting (e.g. Metcalfe et al. 2023 or from LEGACY sam-ple Lund et al. 2017; Silva Aguirre et al. 2017); or from similar methods based on stellar models. While both field and cluster stars modelled with evolutionary tracks are classified as B2 (case i), isolated main-sequence stars su ff er from highly degenerate and uncertain mass estimates that can only be resolved through the tighter physical constraints of cluster coevality or asteroseis-mology. A mass is assigned B3 in the following other cases: (i) when mass is derived from a mass-luminosity, mass-radius, mass-temperature or any other relation (e.g. Eker et al. 2018; Moya et al. 2018, or Benedict et al. 2016; Mann et al. 2019 specifically for M dwarf stars); (ii) from a single-lined spec-troscopic binary and other constraints (e.g. Pourbaix & Bo ffi n2003; Doyle et al. 2011); (iii) from an asteroseismic scaling re-lation that depends on the frequency of maximum power ( νmax ), the large frequency separation ( ∆ν) and e ff ective temperature (e.g. Hekker 2020). 

> 2.2.2. The radius

The term stellar radius generally refers to the Rosseland ra-dius, defined as the radius at which the Rosseland mean op-tical depth is 2 /3. This physical definition is standard in stel-lar atmosphere models, but di ff ers in detail from the radius in-ferred from direct angular diameter measurements from inter-ferometry (Brown 1968), or that measured in eclipsing bina-ries. However, for main-sequence and subgiant stars, the dif-ference is very small ( <∼ 0.1%), and is thus usually neglected in practice. In special cases requiring high precision, this dis-tinction may become relevant (see, e.g., Miller et al. 2020). For M dwarfs this has not been established to the same preci-sion, and even in the most favourable case (NIR observations, where molecular-opacity e ff ects are minimized) the di ff erence reaches ∼ 0.1 − 0.2% (von Braun et al. 2014; Rabus et al. 2019; Schweitzer et al. 2019). We defined as B1 a stellar radius coming from (i) an interferometric angular diameter and an astrometric parallax (e.g. Kervella et al. 2017) or (ii) from a detached eclips-ing and double-lined spectroscopic binary (e.g. Maxted et al. 2020). Similarly to B2 masses, B2 radii are the ones relying on interpolation in stellar evolutionary tracks or asteroseismic fre-quency fitting. Similarly to B3 masses, B3 radii are from similar empirical relations, single-lined spectroscopic binary and other constraints, or from asteroseismic scaling relations. 

> 2.2.3. The luminosity

The stellar luminosity is a property di ffi cult to accurately derive as it requires as many flux measurements as possi-ble in di ff erent photometric bands and relies on flux calibra-tions (Bless & Percival 1997; Bohlin et al. 2014; Soubiran et al. 2024). The luminosity is assigned B1 only when coming from spectrophotometric fluxes and accurate parallaxes, assuming that the flux measurements cover well the whole wavelength range which contains significant contribution to the spectral energy distribution of main-sequence FGKM dwarfs and sub-giants (from UV to IR), e.g. Soubiran et al. (2024). It is as-signed B2 when the stellar luminosity is derived from: (i) classical photometry and bolometric corrections relying on ef-fective temperature, gravity and metallicity parameters (e.g. Creevey et al. 2012b); (ii) interpolation in stellar evolutionary tracks (e.g. Bordé et al. 2020); or (iii) asteroseismic frequency fitting and photometry (e.g., Creevey et al. 2012a). The lumi-nosity is B3 if the surface brightness-colour relations (SBCRs) for the angular diameter is used with parallax and e ff ective tem-perature. Alternatively, combining empirical bolometric fluxes with high-precision parallaxes o ff ers a powerful, largely model-independent pathway to derive luminosities and radii that can be validated directly against eclipsing binary and interferomet-ric benchmarks (Stassun & Torres 2016; Stassun et al. 2017). 

> 2.2.4. The age

The age is probably the most di ffi cult stellar property to ac-curately derive as it is the least direct accessible from the ob-servations. A very complete review on age-dating techniques is given by Soderblom (2010), and on accuracy of ages from stel-lar models by Lebreton et al. (2014a,b). See also Catelan (2018) for the oldest systems. We find that only the Sun can be con-sidered to have a B1 benchmark age from meteorite age dating and helioseismology (Connelly et al. 2017; Bonanno & Fröhlich 2015). All the methods otherwise heavily depend on model as-sumptions. A B2 age can be derived using (i) cosmochronol-ogy in very metal-poor stars using the abundance ratio U /Th (e.g; Cayrel et al. 2001; Shah et al. 2023), (ii) isochrone fitting in stellar clusters (e.g. Edvardsson et al. 1993), (iii) asteroseis-mic frequency fitting (e.g. Metcalfe et al. 2023), (iv) white dwarf cooling in wide binaries based on an initial-to-final mass rela-tion (e.g. Rebassa-Mansergas et al. 2021, 2026), or (v) the Li depletion boundary (e.g. Je ff ries et al. 2013). An age is B3 if based on (i) an asteroseismic scaling relation (e.g. Creevey et al.  

> Article number, page 3 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms

2017), (ii) the gyrochronology method (e.g. Barnes 2007), (iii) the activity from chromospheric or coronal emission lines (e.g. Mamajek & Hillenbrand 2008), (iv) from abundance ratio-age relations (e.g. Nissen et al. 2020), or (v) membership of a stel-lar population (e.g. Engle & Guinan 2023). 

> 2.2.5. The effective temperature

The e ff ective temperature, Teff , for a star with Rosseland radius 

R and luminosity L is defined by the equation 

L = 4πR2σSB T 4eff , (1) where σSB is the Stefan-Boltzmann constant. 1 Dividing both sides of the equation by d2, where d is the distance to the star, leads to the alternative and equivalent definition 

Teff ≡ ( fbol /σ SB )0.25 θ−0.5, (2) where fbol is the bolometric flux at the top of the Earth’s atmo-sphere corrected for interstellar extinction and θ = 2R/d is the angular diameter. The e ff ective temperature is the most impor-tant property governing the formation of stellar spectra. Various techniques to estimate Teff are summarised in the Supplemental Text 1 of Jofré et al. (2019). The values of Teff in this compilation are labelled B1 if derived from any of the following three methods: (i) interfer-ometric angular diameter and spectrophotometric fluxes (e.g. Boyajian et al. 2012; Soubiran et al. 2024); (ii) eclipsing binary radius with orbital parallax and spectrophotometric fluxes (e.g. Maxted et al. 2022); (iii) di ff erential spectroscopic analysis with respect to the Sun only for solar twins with Teff within 50 K of the Sun, and log g, and [Fe /H] within 0.05 dex of the Sun (e.g. Meléndez et al. 2012). Teff is assigned a benchmark level of B2 when estimated from: (i) fitting H α wing profiles using synthetic spectra from 3D and non-LTE stellar atmosphere models (e.g. Giribaldi et al. 2021); (ii) using the infrared flux method (IRFM) based on an absolute calibration of Vega (Casagrande et al. 2006); (iii) broad-band photometric colours through Teff -colour relations (e.g. VandenBerg & Clem 2003); (iv) di ff erential anal-ysis with stellar analogues having B1 Teff ; (v) spectroscopic excitation equilibrium of neutral iron lines (Jofré et al. 2019); or (vi) any other fitting method with spectral syntheses (e.g. Hełminiak et al. 2014). Finally, Teff is B3 if based on empirical relations, e.g. Teff as a function of mass for main-sequence stars Eker et al. 2018; Moya et al. 2018). Until recently, interferometric measurements have been the main source of direct angular diameter measurements for dwarf stars. A Sun-like star at a distance of 50 pc has an angu-lar diameter θ <∼ 0.2 mas, which corresponds to the resolu-tion limits of modern visible-light long-baseline optical inter-ferometers (ten Brummelaar et al. 2005; Armstrong et al. 2013; Haguenauer et al. 2010; Mourard et al. 2026). Thanks to recent instrumental advancements, significant progress has been made in understanding, controlling, and mitigating measurement bi-ases and systematic errors. Nevertheless, repeated measurements of θ from di ff erent studies of the same star have historically shown di ff erences of >∼ 5 per cent (Soubiran et al. 2024), even when using the same underlying data (Bond et al. 2020), see dis-cussion in Sect. 5.4 for more details. The advent of the Gaia mission opens up the possibility to tackle this problem by using angular diameter measurements    

> 1Note that this definition says nothing about the spectrum of the light emitted by the star, i.e. Teff is the e ff ective temperature of a star whether or not it emits light as a black body.

for stars in eclipsing binary systems computed from R/d where the radius R is measured from the analysis of the light curve and the spectroscopic orbit, and the distance d is inferred from the parallax. With space-based photometry and radial velocities measured using stabilised échelle spectrographs, it is now pos-sible to measure R with an accuracy <∼ 0.5 per cent for stars in bright eclipsing binary systems with narrow total eclipses (Maxted et al. 2020; Graczyk et al. 2021). This makes it possi-ble to accurately measure Teff with a precision <∼ 50 K for stars in detached eclipsing binary systems given some method to es-timate fbol for the two stars independently from their observed combined fluxes and directly measured flux ratios (Miller et al. 2020; Maxted et al. 2025). The number of stars in eclipsing bi-naries that have direct Teff measurements using this method is currently quite small, but is growing rapidly. Thus, we can hope to soon have a large enough sample to establish an accurate zero-point for the e ff ective temperature estimates for solar-type stars using spectroscopic and photometric methods. 

> 2.2.6. The surface gravity

The strength and width of absorption lines in the stellar spec-tra are a ff ected by the local pressure in the line-forming region. For a star in hydrostatic equilibrium, this pressure is directly re-lated to the surface gravity, g. By convention, the logarithm of surface gravity is denoted log g, with g in cgs units (cm s −2), so log g≈ 4 for dwarf stars. Thus, an accurate estimate for log g is needed to obtain accurate abundance estimates from the anal-ysis of stellar spectra. It is possible to estimate log g from the analysis of the spectrum itself, but the correlation between log g

and abundance together with the approximations used in stel-lar model atmospheres, instrumental e ff ects, etc. can lead to systematic errors >∼ 0.2 dex in estimates of log g from spec-troscopy (Anguiano et al. 2018). These issues motivate indepen-dent log g determinations. For example, the APOKASC collabo-ration (Pinsonneault et al. 2018) leveraged Kepler asteroseismic gravities to calibrate systematic spectroscopic o ff sets in log g es-timates from APOGEE. The various techniques to determine log g are summarized in the Supplemental Text 1 of Jofré et al. (2019) (see also Sect. 2 of Creevey et al. 2013). Benchmark level B1 is attributed to log g

if determined from a B1 mass and a B1 radius. It is B2 if it comes from: (i) mass and radius where one is B2 and the other is B1 or B2 (including values derived from grid-based asteroseis-mic modeling of individual frequencies); (ii) a primary star in an eclipsing binary with an SB1 orbit, determined via its mean stel-lar density inferred from light curves combined with a primary mass estimate (e.g. Maxted et al. 2023); (iii) fitting the wings of strong lines if the metallicity is known (Supplemental Text 1 of Jofré et al. 2019); or (iv) spectroscopic ionisation equilib-rium from neutral and ionised iron lines. It is assigned B3 if it is computed directly from the asteroseismic νmax scaling relation (Eq. 5) without detailed grid modeling, or if it is derived from a mass and radius where at least one is B3. 

> 2.2.7. The mean stellar density

Throughout this work, we report the mean stellar density as its decimal logarithm, log ⟨ρ⟩, in solar mean density units ( ρ⊙ =

1410 kg m −3). For any star of mass M and radius R in a detached binary system with a companion of mass qM , we can use Ke-pler’s 3 rd law to show that the mean stellar density is given by  

> Article number, page 4 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars

⟨ρ⟩ = 3M

4πR3 = 3π

GP 2(1 + q)

 aR

3

, (3) where P is the orbital period and a is the semi-major axis of the orbit. This quantity a/R is closely related to the duration of the transit in binary stars with total eclipses, and in transiting exo-planet systems. This means that the precision of planet radius estimates from the analysis of their transits can be significantly improved by including an independent estimate of ⟨ρ⟩ in cases where the light curve is too noisy to yield an accurate value of the transit impact parameter. This is of particular relevance to the analysis of P lato light curves for Earth-size planets orbit-ing in the habitable zone of Sun-like stars. It also means that we can make accurate estimates of ⟨ρ⟩ from high signal-to-noise light curves of transiting exoplanets and eclipsing binary sys-tems with very low mass companions (EBLM systems) without the need for accurate, independent estimates for M and R, but this method does require a precise estimate for the eccentric-ity of the orbit (Maxted 2025). Alternatively, Eq. (3) illustrates how the star-planet connection can be leveraged: an independent, precise determination of the stellar density ⟨ρ⟩ (e.g. from astero-seismology; Van Eylen et al. 2014; Lund et al. 2019), combined with the transit-derived scaled semi-major axis a/R, provides a powerful geometric constraint on the system’s orbital eccentric-ity. The dependence of ⟨ρ⟩ on (1 + q) can be ignored in systems where q → 0, so measurements of ⟨ρ⟩ from the light curves of transiting exoplanets with accurate and independent eccentricity measurements are assigned a benchmark level of B1. For typical EBLM systems with q ≈ 0.2, an error of 10% in the estimate of M implies an error ≲ 1% in ⟨ρ⟩. Although this correction is small, it may not be negligible in cases where very accurate val-ues of ⟨ρ⟩ are needed, so measurements of ⟨ρ⟩ from the light curves of EBLM systems are assigned a benchmark level of B2. In cases where independent estimates of the stellar mass are pre-ferred to the values given in the database for the EBLM systems, a small correction can be applied to the values of ⟨ρ⟩ and log g.The values of d log( ⟨ρ⟩)/dM needed for this correction can be found in Maxted (2025). Consequently, while no direct obser-vational measurement method is formally classified at the B3 level for mean stellar density, a B3 benchmark level is assigned to 51 targets in our compiled catalogue (predominantly within our M-dwarf sample) where the calculated density inherits the benchmark level of an empirically-derived B3 mass. 

> 2.2.8. The limb darkening

The reduction in specific intensity from the centre to the limb of the stellar disc is known as limb darkening. The specific in-tensity emitted from a stellar photosphere is typically denoted 

Iλ(μ), where μ is the cosine of the angle between the line of sight and the surface normal vector and λ is the wavelength or band-pass of the observations under consideration. For a spherical star, 

μ = √1 − r2, where r is the radial coordinate from r = 0 at the centre of the stellar disc to r = 1 at the limb. Limb-darkening can be seen directly in high-quality light curves of stars that show transits from an exoplanet or other dark body (e.g. a brown dwarf or very low mass star) as the curvature between the sec-ond and third contact points as the companion scans across the non-uniform intensity distribution of the stellar disc. Maxted (2023b) defined the following parameters that can be used to directly compare limb-darkening profiles measured from high-quality light curves of transiting exoplanets to the specific intensity profile computed from stellar model atmospheres: 

h′ 

> 1

= Iλ(2 /3); 

h′ 

> 2

= h′ 

> 1

− Iλ(1 /3) . (4) Using these parameters that are directly related to the specific intensity profile avoids the ambiguities that arise from using co-effi cients of limb-darkening laws measured from light curves as benchmark quantities. Simulations described in Maxted (2023b) show that the values of ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

) obtained from the least-squares fit of a 4-parameter limb-darkening law are accurate, i.e. close to the actual values for the assumed limb-darkening profile used for the simulations, and that these values are not strongly correlated with each other if the transit impact parameter is not too large (b ≲ 0.6). It was also found that the values of ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

) obtained were almost identical if a di ff erent limb-darkening law was used for the least-squares fits. Based on these results, we consider the values of ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

) measured from high signal-to-noise tran-sit light curves for systems with b ≲ 0.6 using a fit of a flexi-ble limb-darkening law to be benchmark level B1. The values in the benchmark database are taken from Verma et al. (2024) and Fitzpatrick et al. (2025). Verma et al. analysed the same sample as Maxted (2023b) using a regularisation technique to improve the precision of the results. 

> 2.3. Ancillary parameters

Ancillary parameters are also included in the compilation. These were used to derive or update values of the stellar properties given the in database, or to provide additional information about the benchmark stars. These ancillary parameters are the parallax 

ϖ, the limb-darkened angular diameter θLD 2, the bolometric flux 

fbol , the colour excess E(B − V), the rotation period Prot , the iron abundance relative to the Sun [Fe /H] (the metallicity), and the abundance of α-elements relative to iron and to the Sun [ α/Fe]. In addition, for a sub-sample of M-dwarf benchmark stars a ta-ble with X-ray- to bolometric flux ratios fX / fbol is provided (see Sect. 4.9). Contrary to stellar properties no quality assessment was performed for these ancillary parameters. However, for par-allaxes we perform a homogenisation step (see Sect. 4.2).   

> 2.4. Plato benchmark requirements

The various groups in charge of the analysis of P lato data agreed to test and validate their software on a benchmark sample comprising a few hundred FGKM main-sequence and sub-giant stars. The requirements on the range and precision of the stellar properties and parameters for this sample are summarised here: 

– masses in the range [0.08, 2.0] M⊙ with ∆M/M ≤ 5% 

– radii with ∆R/R ≤ 5% 

– luminosities with ∆L/L ≤ 5% 

– age with ∆τ/τ ≤ 10% 

– Teff in the range [2800, 6700] K with ∆Teff ≤ 100 K 

– log g ≥ 3.5 3 dex with ∆ log g ≤ 0.1 dex 

– metallicity in [ −1.5, +0.5] dex with ∆[Fe /H] ≤ 0.1 dex.        

> 2The angular diameter values used to calculate stellar properties are those quoted values taken from the cited works, for which limb-darkened models were used to interpret the observations obtained from Earth.
> 3We follow the usual convention of denoting the logarithm of the sur-face gravity as log gwith gin units of cm s −2.Article number, page 5 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms

For mass and Teff , we combine the requirements from the core P lato stellar samples (P1, P2, and P5), which apply to F5-to K7-type stars, and include the requirements on late-type M dwarfs from the P4 sample as defined in the P lato Input Cata-logue (PIC). 4 We note that these requirements do not need to be fulfilled simultaneously. Furthermore, for some of the parame-ters requirements for higher precision than stated in the list were provided by some of the analysis groups. We thus reduce the list above to one that focuses on the most stringent constraints: 

– masses with ∆M/M ≤ 1% 

– radii with ∆R/R ≤ 1% 

– Teff with ∆Teff ≤ 50 K 

– log g with ∆ log g ≤ 0.05 dex Requirements also consider testing the accuracy of stellar models, which includes the reliability of stellar structure and evolution calculations and the impact of certain choices in the model physics. These have a particularly important impact on the determination of stellar ages. To test the physical accuracy of stellar models, we must examine stars beyond the core sub-giant branch. We therefore include a few red giants with model-independent radii from interferometry and masses from binaries. Extending the PBS sample beyond P lato ’s core demographics (FGKM dwarfs and subgiants) to include giants and metal-poor stars, specifically using the metal-poor dwarf and giant cata-logues of Giribaldi et al. (2021, 2023), is a deliberate strategy. This expanded parameter space provides a larger, robust pool of benchmark-quality properties, o ff ering critical opportunities to validate the P lato data processing pipelines under extreme stel-lar regimes. 

3. Data compilation 

Following an extensive literature compilation by the work pack-age members, our benchmark targets were selected from a com-bination of diverse published works, which must be combined and complemented to fully satisfy P lato ’s calibration require-ments. As a consequence, the choice of the selected targets is necessarily biased, mainly driven by the P lato benchmark re-quirements. The main sources of data are summarized in Ta-ble C.1. 

> 3.1. Binary and multiple systems

To assemble the anchor stars for mass and radius, we rely heavily on binary and multiple stellar systems. We made a selection of stars in eclipsing binary systems from version 2025 /05 /27 of DE-BCat 5 (Detached Eclipsing Binary Catalogue, Southworth 2015) guided by the need to validate the grid of stellar models that are used throughout the P lato stellar analysis system (SAS). The grid is computed in two parts, an FGK-star grid and an M-dwarf grid. The FGK-star grid covers the mass range [0.6, 2.2] M⊙

and the metallicity range [Fe /H] = [−2.5, 0.5] dex. A star with a mass ≈ 2 M⊙ will be an A-type star while it is on the main sequence, but may evolve into an F-type subgiant star. The M-dwarf stellar model grid covers the mass range [0.1, 0.75] M⊙              

> 4The PIC2.2 (Montalto et al. 2026) categorises targets into several sci-entific samples: P1 contains at least 15 000 dwarf and subgiant F5–K7 stars with V≤11 mag; P2 is a bright subset of P1 containing 1 000 targets with V≤8.5 mag; P5 is the main statistical sample containing at least 245 000 F5–K7 dwarfs and subgiants with V≤13 mag; and P4 contains at least 5 000 M-dwarfs with V≤16 mag in the solar vicinity (see Rauer et al. 2025, for details).
> 5https://www.astro.keele.ac.uk/jkt/debcat

and the metallicity range [Fe /H] = [−2.5, 0.3] dex. However, Plato will observe very few M-dwarfs with spectral types later than M4V because they are too faint. We therefore set the fol-lowing limits for the selection of stars from DEBCat: 

– mass in the range [0.25, 2.2] M⊙;

– log g> 3.5; 

– metallicity in the range [ −2.5, +0.5] dex; 

– oblateness ϵ < 0.0025. Stars lacking metallicity or Teff estimates were not included. The equation we used to calculate the oblateness and the limit 

ϵ < 0.0025 are the same as used by Maxted (2025) to define a sample of about 100 stars that were used to calibrate empirical relations to estimate the masses and radii of FGK-type stars. We have included the estimates for Teff and log( L/L⊙) provided in DEBCat for stars selected from this catalogue. The DEBCat web page notes that “ several slightly di ff erent e ff ective temperature scales exist, and there are multiple alternatives for the luminos-ity of the Sun. ” For this reason, we have not attempted to assign a benchmark level to these Teff and log( L/L⊙) estimates except in a few cases where we have been able to assign a benchmark level B1. In addition to stars selected from DEBCat (Southworth 2015) we also collected individual targets with very accurate mass and radius, e.g. α Cen A and B (Kervella et al. 2017). From the Araucaria project (Gallenne et al. 2023), we selected 10 double-lined spectroscopic binaries for which high precision orbital parallaxes and accurate masses at an average level of 0.2% were derived, including three that are also detached eclips-ing binaries (AK For, LL Aqr, and V963 Cen). We also included components of binary stars with accu-rate masses from the review on stellar masses by Serenelli et al. (2021). Components of bright visual binaries from their Table 3 are selected including the orbital parallaxes, and components from detached eclipsing binaries from their Table 2 are also in-cluded. Where possible we computed the rotational period from the measured projected rotational velocity v sin i, as they are very often close to synchronization with the orbital period. Finally, we specifically included M dwarfs in wide binaries, which have been extensively used in the literature to test analysis methods. The stars and most of their parameters were selected from Mann et al. (2015); Rains et al. (2021) and Olander et al. (2025a). The magnitude range of this sample is 8 ≲ G ≲ 14. Masses are provided at benchmark level B3 and radii at level B2 for 14 of these stars, from empirical mass–luminosity re-lations in the K band, and from SED-fitting methods, respec-tively (Mann et al. 2015; Rains et al. 2021). Luminosities were calculated at benchmark level B1 for 16 stars from bolomet-ric fluxes (Mann et al. 2015; Rains et al. 2021) and Gaia paral-laxes (Eq. A.13). E ff ective temperatures are provided at bench-mark level B2 for all of these stars from spectroscopic analyses (Mann et al. 2015; Rains et al. 2021; Olander et al. 2025a). Sur-face gravities are provided for all stars, either from publications (Rains et al. 2021, from empirical mass– and radius–luminosity relations in the K band, 14 stars at level B3, and Olander et al. 2025a, from a fit of observed magnitudes to synthetic ones from evolution models, 9 stars at level B2), or calculated from their database masses and radii (Eq. A.7, 3 stars at level B3). For four of these stars we included ages determined from stellar evolu-tion models by Mann et al. (2015) 6. We note that the angular   

> 6We note that logarithmic values and uncertainties are given in the original publication, resulting in highly asymmetric linear uncertain-ties, with lower 1-sigma limits of 0.6 to 0.9 Gyr for the ages of these Article number, page 6 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars

diameter (an ancillary parameter) provided in the database was calculated for the 14 stars which have radii from Eq. (A.5). See Sect. 4.9 for further ancillary properties of this M-dwarf sample, such as metallicity, rotation, and activity. 

> 3.2. Interferometry and astrometry

For the definition of benchmark parameters dependent on angu-lar diameters, we relied on interferometric and astrometric mea-surements. From the Gaia FGK benchmark stars (GBS, version 3, Soubiran et al. 2024), we selected the stars spanning the main sequence and the subgiant branch. In that paper, the Teff , L, and 

R were derived by compiling interferometric diameters from the JMDC catalogue (Chelli et al. 2016), adhering to constraints on the quality and ancillary parameters as defined by Salsi et al. (2020). The angular diameters were then combined with Gaia 

DR3 parallax measurements (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023b), extinction measurements from Vergely et al. (2022) and bolo-metric flux measurements which were derived in the same work, in order to calculate Teff , L, and R. In addition, the mass and age were estimated by comparing these observed properties to sev-eral stellar models. The result is the addition of 105 stars with a median uncertainty < 1.5% on the radius and < 2% on the mass, where in particular for the mass we refer uniquely to its precision. A dedicated e ff ort was made to obtain reference proper-ties and parameters corresponding to the coolest P lato targets, the M dwarfs encompassed by the P lato sample known as P4, in a similar way as for the GBS. The P4 sample is domi-nated by early- to mid-M dwarfs up to M4, and we selected benchmark M dwarfs consistent with this spectral type range. We focused on stars for which interferometric measurements of the angular diameter have been published with an uncer-tainty of less than 5%. Most of the angular diameter data were taken from Boyajian et al. (2012), Ellis (2022), and Rabus et al. (2019), in order of decreasing number of stars, complemented by von Braun et al. (2014, 2011, 2012); Schaefer et al. (2018); Caballero et al. (2022). Most of these stars have been used in other works for reference and validation (e.g. Souto et al. 2022; Bello-García et al. 2023; Rains et al. 2024; Olander et al. 2025a,b). The magnitude range of this M-dwarf sample is 6 ≲

G ≲ 10. We note that none of these stars are located in the (south-ern) P lato FOV. Masses are provided at benchmark level B3 for 31 of these stars. For most of them the masses are based on empirical mass–luminosity relations in the K band, and are taken from Boyajian et al. (2012) or Rabus et al. (2019), complemented by Mann et al. (2015). In three cases, an empirical mass–radius re-lation was used (Cifuentes et al. 2020; Caballero et al. 2022). For one additional star, stellar evolutionary models were used (Schaefer et al. 2018, GJ 393, level B2). Radii were calculated for all stars from their measured angular diameters and Gaia 

DR3 parallaxes (Eq. A.1). Measurements of bolometric flux are provided for all stars, largely from the same sources as the an-gular diameter. However, for seven stars the bolometric flux was instead calculated from the luminosity values published in Cifuentes et al. (2020) and Caballero et al. (2022), using Gaia 

DR3 parallaxes (Eq. A.17). For all stars with measured bolomet-ric flux, the luminosity was in turn calculated (with Gaia DR3 parallaxes) from Eq. (A.13). 

> four stars, while the PBS database only quotes the larger uncertainties corresponding to the upper limits (see Sect. 4.3).

Ages are particularly di ffi cult to determine for M dwarfs from stellar evolution models, due to their long main-sequence life times. We include an isochrone age of 80(40) Myr for the star GJ 393 from Schaefer et al. (2018) in the database, but we note that the authors quote another possible age range from 0.06 to more than 10 Gyr and argue that the star is likely an older metal-poor star. An alternative method is to assign an age to M dwarfs from a stellar companion or a larger group of stars. Results from this age-by-association method were included for four of the in-terferometric M dwarfs, from Caballero et al. (2022) for GJ 486 (based on a kinematics analysis by Passegger et al. 2019), and from Engle & Guinan (2023) for GJ 273, GJ 581, and GJ 699. Eff ective temperatures are provided at benchmark level B1 for all of these stars, calculated from their measured angular di-ameters and bolometric fluxes (Eq. A.19). Surface gravities are provided at benchmark level B3 for 30 of these stars, calculated from a B1 radius and a B3 mass (Eq. A.7). One additional star has a B2 mass, and hence a calculated B2 log g. For one more star a B2 log g value was adopted from Soubiran et al. (2024). For ancillary properties of this M-dwarf sample in addition to angular diameter and bolometric flux, such as metallicity, rota-tion, and activity, see Sect. 4.9. 

> 3.3. Asteroseismic samples

Stellar properties can be highly constrained using global seis-mic parameters. We compiled Kepler FGK targets (Mathur et al. 2012; Lund et al. 2017; Creevey et al. 2017; Silva Aguirre et al. 2017). In the Gaia -Kepler Stellar Properties Catalogue (Berger et al. 2020) of almost 200 000 stars, we selected 29 tar-gets that fulfilled all the P lato requirements, except for the preci-sion on metallicity that was slightly increased to ∆[Fe /H] ≤ 0.12 to have a sizeable sample. The stellar properties were derived from MIST isochrones (Choi et al. 2016), broadband photom-etry, Gaia DR2 parallaxes and spectroscopic metallicities. The 29 selected stars all have a goodness-of-fit parameter larger than 0.99 indicating reliable ages. In the A pogee -Kepler catalogue (Claytor et al. 2020) of about 500 cool dwarf stars ( Teff < 5000 K, log g> 4.0), we se-lected 19 targets satisfying ∆M/M ≤ 5% , ∆R/R ≤ 5% and 

∆τ/τ ≤ 10%. This cross-survey is one of the few providing a determination of the rotational period based on the analysis of 

Kepler light curves with wavelet decomposition. Also α-element abundances are included. Uncertainties were not provided for log g, so we computed them using the relations given in Ap-pendix A. From the K2 asteroseismic KEYSTONE sample of dwarf and subgiant solar-like oscillators (Lund et al. 2024, about 170 stars,), we adopted the 33 stars from Lund et al. (2016) (see also Chaplin et al. 2015) that were observed during K2 Campaigns 1-3 and have stellar parameters from modelling of the global as-teroseismic parameters ∆ν and νmax . We additionally included 31 stars from Zhou et al. (2024a) who analysed T ess data. 

> 3.4. Large surveys

We also select stars from several spectroscopic samples, includ-ing large surveys. We selected the metal-poor dwarf stars Titans I (Giribaldi et al. 2021), and red giants Titans II (Giribaldi et al. 2023) because of their precise and accurate Teff . This sam-ple has Teff , log g, and [Fe /H] derived by one di ff erent method each, therefore biases related to parameter intercorrelation are minimized. E ff ective temperature was derived by fitting  

> Article number, page 7 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms

the wings of the Balmer H α lines with 3D NLTE synthetic grids (Amarsi et al. 2018) using the normalization method in Giribaldi et al. (2019). The Teff scale of this sample was proven to be fully compatible with Teff inferred by interferometry of the Gaia FGK benchmark stars (Heiter et al. 2015) and with the Teff scale of the InfraRed Flux Method (IRFM) implemen-tations of Casagrande et al. (2010, 2021). The surface gravity of dwarfs was derived by isochrone fitting using Yonsei-Yale mod-els (Kim et al. 2002; Yi et al. 2003) and Gaia parallaxes. In the SPOCS catalogue (Valenti & Fischer 2005) of about 1000 FGK dwarf stars, we selected nine bright targets. Lu-minosities are computed from apparent magnitudes, parallaxes and bolometric corrections, radii from luminosities and spec-troscopic e ff ective temperatures, and masses from spectroscopic log g and radii. Ages are derived by isochrone fitting, with a con-servative 10% uncertainty chosen when reported as zero. Finally, the golden sample of Gaia astrophysical parameters (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023a) provides very high precision parameters. We selected among this catalogue those FGK dwarfs and subgiants in the P lato fields of view with G < 9.1, and sepa-rated the stars in bins of Teff and log g to select the 1–3 brightest targets in each bin. This resulted in about 60 FGK stars. Furthermore, we included 40 M dwarfs with 13 < G < 16. The parameters provided for this sample in the present database are radius, luminosity, Teff , and log g for all stars, masses for a subset, and ages for the FGK part only. We initially considered including targets from the G alah 

DR3 survey (Buder et al. 2021) and the extended Hipparcos 

compilation (XHIP, Anderson & Francis 2012). However, we ultimately decided to exclude both catalogues from the fi-nal database. While large spectroscopic surveys like G alah ,Apogee , or Gaia -ESO provide valuable atmospheric parame-ters ( Teff , log g, and [Fe /H]), they do not directly yield the model-independent fundamental masses and radii required for our benchmark scale. Potential systematic trends in Teff and log g

currently limit their immediate applicability as high-fidelity ref-erence standards (e.g. Buder et al. 2021). In the case of XHIP, the available age estimates are based on old data and original 

Hipparcos parallaxes. Consequently, they were deemed not use-ful as modern benchmark values to test age estimates that are based on highly precise Gaia parallaxes and photometry. 

> 3.5. Solar analogues

We explicitly compile individual, well-studied solar analogues in the present catalogue. These include prime standards (i.e. so-lar twins) such as 18 Sco (Bazot et al. 2011) and HIP 56948 (Meléndez et al. 2012). In addition to its precisely determined fundamental parameters, 18 Sco has a well-characterised rota-tion period and magnetic activity cycles. Long-term observations reveal a shorter chromospheric activity cycle of approximately 7 yr and a longer periodicity of approximately 15 yr, inter-preted as a Hale-like magnetic cycle associated with changes in the star’s global magnetic geometry (do Nascimento et al. 2023). This makes 18 Sco a particularly valuable benchmark not only for fundamental stellar parameters, but also for the rotational and magnetic evolution of solar-type stars. We also include the solar analogue components from binary systems where astero-seismic and transit constraints are available (such as LL Aqr A (Graczyk et al. 2016) Rigil Kentaurus ( α Cen A, Morel 2018) and 16 Cyg B (Morel et al. 2021). In addition, 28 solar-analogue stars were selected from a parent table of ∼5 000 solar analogues compiled by Gaia Collaboration et al. (2023a). These targets were chosen to have parameters closest to solar values, satisfying similarity thresholds of ±100 K in Teff , ±0.25 dex in log g, ±0.22 dex in [Fe /H], ±0.05 M⊙ in mass, and ±0.2 R⊙ in radius, while also passing a rigorous filter on Gaia astrometric, photometric, and processing quality flags. The selected stars represent the bright-est solar analogues in the parent sample (7 .2 < G < 10 .0) and all have published RVS spectra. 

4. Methods 

> 4.1. Nomenclature

The nomenclature used in the PBS database is designed to sys-tematically identify each star with a main name following a pri-oritized scheme plus an identifier . This will ensure consistency and ease of cross-identification. The main name of a star is chosen to comply with the S imbad 

database conventions. It is selected among commonly used des-ignations that allow a reliable match with major astronomical catalogues. The priority for selecting the main name follows a hierarchical order based on the star’s common catalogue iden-tifiers, beginning with Bayer or Flamsteed designations ( e.g. ,

alf Cen 7 or 18 Sco ), followed by cluster designations ( e.g. ,

Cl* NGC 6809 SAW V54 ), variable star names (from GCVS, 

e.g. , AI Phe ), and then other catalogues such as HD designation (Henry Draper, e.g. HD 179260 ), EBLM designation (Eclipsing Binary with a Low Mass star, e.g. EBLM J0608-59 ), TYC des-ignation (Tycho, e.g. TYC 8533-950-1 ), and 2MASS (Two Mi-cron All Sky Survey, e.g. 2MASS J03553688+5214291 ). No use of TIC, KIC or BD appear in the main name. In addition, 13 benchmark stars have only a Gaia DR3 main name. Using this 

main name, all of these stars are retrievable in S imbad .Each star entry is associated with a unique identifier from ei-ther the Gaia DR3 or Hipparcos catalogue. We prioritize Gaia 

DR3 identifiers due to their recent and comprehensive astromet-ric coverage, falling back to Hipparcos identifiers for bright stars (G ≲ 3) where Gaia sources are unavailable. In total, the sam-ple includes 972 unique Gaia DR3 identifiers and 7 unique Hip-parcos identifiers. Within the Gaia DR3 subset, 123 sources are unresolved binaries and two are unresolved triples: Gaia DR3 3424609014036545920 (* 1 Gem A, Ba, Bb) and Gaia DR3 3312892757136810880 (HD 28363A , Ba, Bb in the Hyades). Among the 7 Hipparcos identifiers, one is an unresolved system: 

HIP 24608 (α Aur A and B). For some bright and nearby binary systems the two compo-nents of a binary star system have di ff erent Gaia DR3 identifiers and separate entries in the S imbad database. In these cases we include the component identifier as part of the main name, e.g. 

16 Cyg A and 16 Cyg B . When the two components of a bi-nary are not resolved in S imbad , then the component field in the PBS database is used to distinguish them. Magnitudes refer to the magnitude of the source, not the magnitude of the individual components for unresolved sources, e.g. eclipsing binary stars. Apparent magnitudes for all sources are taken from the S imbad 

database. We use the Gaia G magnitude when available from Simbad , otherwise the V magnitude is used. 

> 4.2. Homogenisation of parallaxes

As we aim to provide a consolidated catalogue of stellar parame-ters, we re-calculate the luminosity and radius using a consistent    

> 7We use fixed-width font to emphasize where identifiers correspond to an exact text string in our database or in the S imbad database Article number, page 8 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars

approach for the distance determination. Unless indicated in the database, we exploited the parallaxes from Gaia DR3 and ap-plied the zero-point correction of Lindegren et al. (2021), includ-ing for sources that have astrometric solutions in the non-single star tables, as suggested by Nagarajan & El-Badry (2024). The cases where we did not adopt this approach was when the Hip-parcos parallax was more precise, or for some specific binary systems. Of the 1094 stars in the catalogue with a parallax, the 

Gaia DR3 parallaxes are used for 1003. 

> 4.3. Handling multiple values from various sources and uncertainties

As a catalogue of benchmark values, we decided to provide only one value per stellar property per star. Between 100-150 bench-mark stars appeared with multiple values for a given stellar prop-erty from di ff erent sources in the original compilation of the cat-alogue. To disambiguate this, we proceeded as follows: in the cases where the various values were in agreement with each other, we either selected the most recent reference, or the refer-ence with the largest provided number of properties, or the ref-erence with the best precision. The reference leading to a stellar property with a B1 value was always the preferred one. When we performed a new calculation of a stellar property from other parameters in the database (for which the references to publications are provided), then the reference to the corre-sponding equation that was used is given (see Appendix A). Propagation of uncertainties was done using equations with even numbers provided in Appendix A. The uncertainties provided are symmetric. When asymmetric values were given in the liter-ature, we adopted the larger absolute value. In this respect, the uncertainties are conservative. In the cases where the various values of a stellar property were not in agreement, we tried to understand why and selected the value that was considered to be more consistent with other stellar properties. The most striking example concerns α Cen B (main name * alf02 Cen , identifier HIP 71681), where a dis-crepancy exceeding 11 σ (an absolute di ff erence of 0 .0532 M⊙)exists between the selected B1 mass of 0 .9092 ± 0.0025 M⊙

(Akeson et al. 2021), obtained from a joint astrometric and SB2 solution, and the B2 mass of 0 .856 ±0.004 M⊙ (Shan et al. 2024), estimated from stellar evolution models. Another notable case is the radius of Procyon A (main name * alf CMi A , identifier 

HIP 37279 ). Its B2 radius of 1 .919 ±0.015 R⊙ (from the SPOCS sample; Valenti & Fischer 2005) di ff ers by 7 σ (0 .1236 R⊙) from the calculated B1 radius of 2 .0426 ± 0.0093 R⊙, derived from its angular diameter (Baines et al. 2021) and Hipparcos parallax (van Leeuwen 2007) using Eq. (A.1). Finally, for the luminosity of Procyon A, the value of 6 .08 ±0.19 L⊙ derived from Teff and R

via the Stefan-Boltzmann law (Eq. A.15) deviates by nearly 5 σ

(an absolute di ff erence of 0 .969 L⊙) from the selected B1 value of 7 .049 ± 0.064 L⊙ computed directly from the bolometric flux (Soubiran et al. 2024) and parallax (Eq. A.13). In all cases we aimed to trace the source of a property to the original work in which that property was measured or estimated and include the corresponding publication as a reference. 

> 4.4. Mean stellar density

The value of log ⟨ρ⟩ and its uncertainty were computed directly from the mass and radius for benchmark stars where both these quantities are present in the database. In this case the lowest benchmark level from these input quantities is inherited. We also include a sample of benchmark stars in transiting exoplanet sys-tems and eclipsing binaries with low mass companions (EBLM systems) where ⟨ρ⟩ has been computed from the transit light curve, as described in Sect. 2.2.7. The data for these stars are all taken from Maxted (2025). These stars can also be used as benchmark stars for log g estimates. Of the 36 stars from Maxted (2025), 28 are the primary stars in EBLM systems with a com-panion that is at least 8 magnitudes fainter than the primary star in the V band. EBLM systems can be identified by the presence of an entry for the quantity d log( ρ/ρ ⊙) 

> dM /M⊙

in the database. This quan-tity can be used to apply a small correction to these values of 

⟨ρ⟩ or log g in cases where an independent estimate of the stellar mass is preferred to the value given in the database. For the bi-nary systems EBLM J0113 +31 and EBLM J0608 −59, the value of d log( ρ/ρ ⊙) 

> dM /M⊙

is given as 0.000 because the mass ratio has been measured directly for these binary systems (Maxted et al. 2022, 2024). The values of mass, radius, ⟨ρ⟩ and log g are therefore benchmark level B1, as is the e ff ective temperature of these stars measured from their radius, parallax and bolometric flux. The apparent magnitudes and flux ratios at several optical and near-infrared wavelengths for these EBs are provided in Maxted et al. (2022, 2024) and Maxted (2023a). 

> 4.5. Limb darkening

Values of the limb-darkening parameters ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

) for FGK stars with transiting exoplanets in the Kepler and T ess bands are taken from Maxted (2023b). These and the values of ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

)measured using very similar methodology based on T ess light curves of solar-type stars transited by very low mass stars by Fitzpatrick et al. (2025) are considered to be benchmark level B1. Values of ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

) for the sample of stars studied by Maxted (2023b) have also been measured by Verma et al. (2024) using a regularisation technique to improve the precision of these mea-surements. We decided to use the measurements from Maxted (2023b) in our table of benchmark values so that all the limb darkening values are measured in a consistent way. 

> 4.6. Calculations/update of stellar properties

The derivation and homogenisation of fundamental stellar prop-erties were performed using Python processing pipeline devel-oped specifically for this work package ( benchpy ). This auto-mated pipeline systematically evaluates the available input pa-rameters—such as parallax, angular diameter, bolometric flux, and mass—to determine the optimal mathematical relations for computing missing properties or updating existing ones. Specif-ically, benchpy computes the stellar radius, surface gravity (log g), e ff ective temperature ( Teff ), luminosity, and empirical mass by applying the physical relations detailed in Appendix A. To ensure physical consistency, the software robustly propagates uncertainties from the input observables to the derived quantities and enforces rigorous validity checks against predefined physi-cal limits. In instances where multiple derivation paths are avail-able, the pipeline resolves degeneracies by preferentially select-ing the method that relies on the most direct observables, thereby yielding the highest possible benchmark level for the final cata-logue of stellar parameters. We verified the consistency between the reference log g val-ues compiled in the catalogue (derived predominantly from inde-pendent spectroscopic or asteroseismic analyses) and the surface gravities calculated directly from the assessed stellar masses and radii via Eq. A.7. For the ∼ 800 stars with available masses,  

> Article number, page 9 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms

radii, and reference log g, the mean di ff erence is under 0 .001 dex (standard deviation 0 .030 dex). Over 90% of stars agree to within 0.05 dex, and 97% agree to within 0 .10 dex. We also verified the mutual consistency between stellar radii, luminosities, bolo-metric fluxes, and parallaxes. For the 850 stars with all required quantities available, the calculated luminosities, Eq. (A.13), and bolometric fluxes, Eq. (A.17), show median relative di ff erences under 0 .01% (standard deviations of 2 .1% and 1 .7%, respec-tively), with over 97% of stars agreeing to within 1%. 

4.7. Rotation periods 

For stars in detached eclipsing binaries and bright visual bina-ries, estimates of the rotation period, Prot , have been obtained through various methods. In a number of cases, Prot could be adopted directly from the source publications. This includes measurements from the out-of-eclipse portion of the light curve, analysed via autocorrelation or periodogram approaches (e.g., Kraus et al. 2017), as well as individual determinations using the Rossiter-McLaughlin e ff ect (Rossiter 1924; Sybilski et al. 2018). Furthermore, when authors explicitly established tidal synchronisation, we adopted Prot = Porb along with its corre-sponding uncertainties. However, in most cases, the rotation period estimates were computed from the projected equatorial rotation velocity, 

v sin irot , measured from spectral line broadening and converted to Prot using the direct radius measurement. These estimates rely on the assumption of spin-orbit alignment, meaning the rota-tion axis of the star, irot , is assumed to be aligned with the bi-nary star orbit ( irot = iorb ). For detached eclipsing binary stars, this orbital inclination is typically iorb ≈ 90 ◦. This assumption has been tested for a small sample of solar-type stars with M-dwarf companions and found to be approximately correct for orbital periods up to about 15 days (Spejcher et al. 2025). It is not yet fully known under what circumstances this approx-imation breaks down for late-type stars, though it is known to be a poor approximation for some early-type stars in short-period binary systems (Marcussen & Albrecht 2022) and F-type stars in very eccentric orbits with P > 50 d (Marcussen et al. 2024). Assuming irot = 90 ◦ yields an estimated period Pest =

2πR/(v sin irot ), which represents an upper limit to the true period (Prot = Pest sin irot ≤ Pest ). In the database, these derived val-ues are explicitly flagged as upper limits via prot_flag , while 

prot_type distinguishes direct photometric modulation, v sin i

estimates, and tidally synchronised orbital periods. For single stars and wide binary components lacking photo-metric periods, v sin i values are compiled from high-resolution spectroscopic literature. However, for slow rotators, measure-ments approach instrumental resolution limits and are strongly degenerate with macroturbulence broadening and the unknown inclination angle sin i. In this regime, derived Prot estimates carry large uncertainties and generally represent upper limits. For in-formation on rotation periods of M dwarfs see Sect. 4.9. Addi-tionally, photometrically derived modulation periods trace active region latitudes; surface di ff erential rotation and magnetic cycle migration can thus introduce small temporal variations into the measured Prot .

4.8. Global asteroseismic parameters 

The frequency at maximum power, νmax , and the large frequency separation, ∆ν, have been compiled from several catalogues. In order of preference, we adopted the following values: 26 val-0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000      

> max, obs [Hz]
> 01000 2000 3000 4000 5000
> max, scale  [ Hz]
> 0.8
> 0.6
> 0.4
> 0.2
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 [Fe/H]
> Fig. 1. Comparison of the global asteroseismic frequencies at maxi-mum power from scaling relations for stars in the P lato benchmark star database to published estimates from various catalogues, colour-coded by metallicity. Open symbols have no metallicity. Symbol size is pro-portional to radius. Stars with a standard error larger than 0.1 for log g
> were excluded from the figure.

ues for various targets from Soubiran et al. (2024); for Kepler 

targets, one value from Mathur et al. (2022), 75 values from Serenelli et al. (2017), 12 values from Lund et al. (2017), and 30 values from Davies et al. (2016); for T ess targets, 45 values from Lund et al. (2025), 31 values from Zhou et al. (2024a), and four values from Hatt et al. (2023); and finally, 165 values for K2 tar-gets from Lund et al. (2024). The values of νmax and ∆ν from these catalogues are com-pared to the predicted values in Fig. 1, using the following scal-ing relations: 

νmax 

νmax ,⊙

= gg⊙

! s

Teff 

Teff ,⊙

(5) assuming solar values of νmax ,⊙ and ∆ν⊙ given in Table B.1 from Huber et al. (2011). Hekker (2020) discusses scaling re-lations not only in the context of dwarfs but also of subdwarfs and giants. We note a systematic deviation at high frequencies (νmax ≳ 2500 μHz), which corresponds to the unevolved main-sequence dwarf regime. This skewness might represent a known systematic limitation of the classical scaling relation, which as-sumes a simplified isothermal atmosphere and neglects varia-tions in the mean molecular weight, the first adiabatic exponent, and the outer boundary structures of the atmospheres of dwarf stars (Viani et al. 2017; Zhou et al. 2024b). 

4.9. Ancillary properties for M dwarfs 

The PBS database includes two samples of early- to mid-M dwarfs, in wide binary systems and with precise angular di-ameters from interferometry (see Sects. 3.1 and 3.2, respec-tively, and Table C.1). In addition to the data described in those sections, we provide metallicities, rotation periods, and an indicator for chromospheric activity for these samples. The metallicities of about half of the M dwarfs in the the wide-binary sample are those resulting from an analysis of opti-cal high-resolution spectra of the respective FGK primaries by Sousa et al. (2008); Brewer et al. (2016); Montes et al. (2018);                

> Article number, page 10 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 Magnitude [mag] 050 100 150 200 PBS catalogue At least one B1 PLATO fi elds
> Fig. 2. Distribution of Gaia G magnitudes for di ff erent samples of the Plato benchmark stars catalogue. Magnitudes lower than 3 are in V
> band.

Rice & Brewer (2020). For the other M dwarfs in that sam-ple, the metallicities are based on an analysis of high-resolution near-infrared spectra (Olander et al. 2025a, 9 stars), or a fit of low-resolution flux-calibrated spectra (Mann et al. 2015, 3 stars). Metallicity values are also provided for all M dwarfs in the interferometry sample, and were taken from Marfil et al. (2021) for the majority, supplemented by Mann et al. (2015) and Maldonado et al. (2020). Rotation periods were included in the database for 27 stars (26 in the interferometry sample and the wide binary compo-nent HD 154363B), taken from Suárez Mascareño et al. (2015, 2016, 2018); Díez Alonso et al. (2019); Díaz et al. (2019); Caballero et al. (2022); Engle & Guinan (2023); Shan et al. (2024). All of these were determined from an analysis of the modulation of a photometric or spectroscopic time series by magnetically active regions. M dwarfs often show signs of chromospheric activity and significant magnetic fields, which can have an impact on the measurement or interpretation of stellar parameters. In order to assess the level of activity of the stars in the two M dwarf samples, we compiled X-ray flux measurements from the liter-ature, complemented by data obtained directly from the XMM-Newton (4XMM-DR14, Webb et al. 2020), ROSAT (2RXP or 2RXS, Rosat 2000; Boller et al. 2016), or eROSITA (eRASS1, Merloni et al. 2024) catalogues. X-ray fluxes are available for 13 stars in the wide-binary sample and 38 stars in the interfer-ometry sample. We stress that these are to be used as ancillary information for a rough assessment of stellar activity only. The X-ray fluxes are not on a homogeneous scale, their quality has not been investigated, and they are therefore not intended for benchmarking. Since the X-ray properties are only available for a small number of stars among the PBS they are listed separately in Table D.1. The quantity listed in the table is the logarithmic X-ray to bolometric flux ratio log( fX / fbol ), which is equivalent to the X-ray to bolometric luminosity ratio log( LX /L). Here, fX or LX are the X-ray surface flux or luminosity in the 0.1–2.4 keV band, and fbol or L are the bolometric flux or the (bolometric) lumi-nosity. Data ( LX /L) were taken from Zhu & Preibisch (2025) for 25 stars (who used X-ray data from ROSAT, eROSITA, XMM-Newton, or Chandra, and luminosities from Gaia DR3), from Reiners et al. (2022) for 9 stars (who used X-ray data from ROSAT 1RXS and luminosities from Schweitzer et al. 2019), and from Caramazza et al. (2023) for the binary components GJ 745 A and B (based on XMM-Newton data). For the remain-ing 15 stars we extracted X-ray count rates from XMM-Newton using the web interface provided by the XMM-Newton Sur-vey Science Centre 8 (Zolotukhin et al. 2017), and from ROSAT 2RXP, eRASS1, and ROSAT 2RXS via VizieR. The X-ray count rates were converted to X-ray fluxes using the instrument-specific conversion factors given in Table 1 of Caramazza et al. (2023). The X-ray fluxes were then divided by the bolometric fluxes from the PBS database to obtain the X-ray to bolometric flux ratio. One star in the interferometry sample is currently lacking an X-ray flux: HD 173739 (GJ 725A). The 13 stars in the wide-binary sample without X-ray fluxes are the following: 2MASS J03553688 +5214291, 2MASS J03044335 +6144097, 2MASS J03150093 +0103083, 2MASS J14045583 +0157230, HD 11964 B, TYC 5748-175-1, TYC 6373-228-1, HD 46375 B, HD 164595 B, 2MASS J01542093-1543479, HD 38529 B, HD 18143 C, HD 183870 B. 

4.10. Cluster membership 

Probable or possible member stars of open clusters were iden-tified using the catalogue of Hunt & Re ff ert (2023). Cross-matching with this catalogue was performed using the Gaia DR3 identifier. We note that some of the stars in the PBS database have identifiers in the S imbad database starting with Cl* , indi-cating cluster membership, but they do not appear in the cata-logue by Hunt & Re ff ert. This includes members of well-known open clusters such as the Pleiades ( Cl* Melotte 22 ... ), and the Hyades ( Cl* Melotte 25 ... ). A few eclipsing binaries in the PBS database are members of globular clusters. These eclipsing binaries in globular clusters can be identified from their names, e.g. Cl* NGC 6121 ... (M4), NGC 104 (47 Tuc), etc. 

5. The P lato benchmark stars catalogue 

The P lato benchmark stars catalogue (PBS) is accessible via CDS VizieR and features a dedicated web portal 9. To optimise the discoverability of benchmark targets, the portal includes a unified search field with a fallback to S imbad . Users can browse the database and use column filtering to refine custom samples. Furthermore, a TAP service supporting ADQL queries is avail-able for more complex and customisable requests. The website also allows users to visualise the entire benchmark sample, or specific subsamples, through interactive sky maps, Hertzsprung-Russell (HR) diagrams, and mass-luminosity as well as mass-radius relations. 

5.1. General properties 

This first version of the PBS database gathers 1090 bench-mark stars covering magnitudes from V = −1.5 (Sirius) to G = 19.8 (an eclipsing binary in the globular cluster 47 Tuc, 

Gaia DR3 4689641564666423040 ), see Fig. 2. The median G

magnitude of the whole PBS catalogue is 8.9 while slightly less bright in the P lato fields (10.6), and slightly brighter for stars with at least one B1 property (8.3). Eight stellar properties are                    

> 8https://xmm-catalog.irap.omp.eu/ , accessed 2025-06-11
> 9https://astro.ulb.ac.be/pbs
> Article number, page 11 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms 150° 120° 90° 60° 30° 0° 330° 300° 270° 240° 210° -75° -60° -45° -30° -15° 0° 15° 30° 45° 60° 75°
> LOPN1 LOPS2
> NCP SCP
> PBS catalogue (1090) Bronze sample (416) Silver sample (195) Gold sample (15) Equator
> Fig. 3. Sky map of the P lato benchmark stars in Galactic coordinates. Di ff erent symbols indicate benchmark quality samples as defined in the text (Sect. 5.3). Symbol size increases with apparent brightness.

assessed into three benchmark levels (B1, B2, and B3), reflect-ing their reliability as defined in Sect. 2. Table 1 summarizes the distribution over benchmark levels of the eight stellar prop-erties assessed. Out of the 1090 stars in the database, surface gravity (log g) is the most widely assessed parameter with 982 stars, followed by mass ( M, 840 stars) and e ff ective temperature (Teff , 831 stars). 496 stars have B2 age in the catalogue and limb darkening coe ffi cients are reported for 62 stars. Fig. 3 displays a Mollweide projection of the Galactic celestial distribution of the PBS catalogue. About 285 benchmark stars are located in the Plato Northern Long-duration Observation Phase field (LOPN1; 

α ≃ 277 .1◦, δ ≃ 52 .9◦, Nascimbeni et al. 2022 and priv. comm.), while 143 stars are in the Southern field (LOPS2; α ≃ 95 .3◦,

δ ≃ − 47 .9◦ Nascimbeni et al. 2025). The high-density north-ern cluster in LOPN1 corresponds to the original Kepler field, and the ecliptic bands reflect the K2 campaigns. In contrast, the concentration of 143 stars in LOPS2 is a deliberate selection rather than a natural overdensity. Because LOPS2 is P lato ’s first long-pointing field, we systematically cross-matched candidates within its footprint to support early in-flight pipeline validation (scvPIC; Zwintz et al. 2026; Nascimbeni et al. 2025). The de-tails of the cross matches are given in Table 2. The distributions of assessed values per benchmark level (excluding mean density and limb-darkening coe ffi cient) are displayed in Figure F.1. 

5.2. Fulfilment of work package requirements 

We compared the initial contents of the PBS catalogue with the pre-defined scientific requirements gathered from the vari-ous P lato stellar science work packages (see Sect. 2.4). Sev-eral key requirements are already successfully met; for exam-ple, the selected M dwarfs with precise Teff , log g, and [Fe /H] are highly suitable for validating 3D model atmospheres, pro-vided high-resolution, high-signal-to-noise near-infrared spec-tra are acquired to measure line asymmetries. In other cases, the PBS sample has bypassed original observational limitations: while early requirements anticipated that high-precision limb-darkening profiles could only be measured via long-baseline in-terferometry on very bright stars ( θ > 0.8 mas), the database in-cludes B1-level limb-darkening coe ffi cients derived much more precisely from space-based transit light curves of hot Jupiters and low-mass eclipsing companions (Verma et al. 2024). To fully satisfy requirements demanding a homogeneous metallic-ity scale, future e ff orts will focus on analysing spectra for the PBS obtained either from data archives or from new observations with a single pipeline, such as the Stellar Abundances and atmo-spheric Parameters Pipeline (SAPP, Gent et al. 2022), which is also used for the prime mission targets. Overall, rather than act-ing as a static technical checklist, the PBS catalogue provides a robust starting point that will evolve through ongoing dialogue with P lato work package leaders to guide future observations and resolve model degeneracies. 

5.3. Discussion 

To highlight the highest-precision benchmark stars, we cate-gorise the PBS catalogue into three quality samples: a gold sam-ple (15 stars with B1 mass, radius, and luminosity), a silver sam-ple (195 stars with B1 mass and radius), and a bronze sample (416 stars with at least one B1 property). The gold sample con-sists exclusively of binary star components, with detailed prop-erties provided in Table E.1 and ancillary parameters available in the online catalogue. We emphasize that the gold sample is included in the silver sample which is included in the bronze sample. These samples are visualised in the combined HR and Kiel diagrams (Fig. 4), where di ff erent symbols distinguish the benchmark quality. Figure 5 presents the mass-luminosity and mass-radius relations. The distributions clearly outline the main-

> Article number, page 12

Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars 10 −3  

> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> L [L  ⊙ ]Gold (15) Silver (179) Bronze (222) Other (597) 10000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 8000 9000
> Teff [K] 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 log  g
> Gold (15) Silver (180) Bronze (253) Other (605)
> −2.5
> −2.0
> −1.5
> −1.0
> −0.5 0.0 0.5 [Fe/H]

Fig. 4. Hertzsprung-Russell (top) and Kiel (bottom) diagrams. Custom symbols distinguish the benchmark quality: large red-bordered stars ( gold ), medium filled triangles ( silver ), small filled circles ( bronze ), and tiny open squares for the remaining stars. They are colour-coded by metallicity. Empty symbols means that no metallicity values are present in the database. 

Table 1. Summary of assessed parameters for the 1090 PBS. Parameter B1 B2 B3 Total N/AMass ( M) 249 500 91 840 250 Radius ( R) 332 464 0 796 294 Luminosity ( L) 168 575 0 743 347 Age ( τ) 0 452 27 479 611 Eff ective Temperature ( Teff ) 150 681 0 831 259 Surface gravity (log g) 195 740 47 982 108 Mean density (log ⟨ρ⟩) 204 538 45 787 303 LD coe ffi cients ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

) 62 0 0 62 1028 

Note: Total counts include only benchmark-assessed parameters (B1, B2, B3), excluding compiled numerical values without an assigned benchmark level (cf. Fig. F.1). 

sequence stellar population, characterised by a steep increase of both luminosity and radius with stellar mass. Particularly note-worthy is the distribution of the high-precision benchmark sam-ples: the gold sample populates a tight, low-scatter sequence be-tween approximately 0.7 M⊙ and 2.0 M⊙. The stars in the M dwarfs region show very little dispersion, in particular in Fig. 5, and all of them belong to the silver and bronze samples. The expected metallicity e ff ect is also clearly visible, making metal-poor subgiants between 0.5 and 1 M⊙ slightly more luminous or inflated, compared to their solar-metallicity counterparts. The metal-poor star with a mass of about 0.6 M⊙ and Teff 

about 5000 K in the silver sample is the secondary compo-nent in a double-lined eclipsing binary system (Cl* NGC 6809 SAW V54 B). The e ff ective temperature of this star given in Kaluzny et al. (2014), based on both light-curve fitting and a the-oretical colour-Teff calibration, seems too high for its mass and radius (see also Sect. 5.4). We note that no benchmark level is assigned to the e ff ective temperature of this star, following the reasoning in Sect. 3.1. When using the PBS catalogue to validate theoretical frame-works, any discrepancies between model predictions and the tabulated benchmark values should be interpreted in the con-text of the assigned benchmark levels. A discrepant B1 prop-erty – which is derived from direct, highly precise, and model-independent measurements – typically points to systematic er-rors in the user’s observational data or analytical methods rather than the benchmark value itself, though historical data quality issues in eclipsing binaries remain a known factor (Torres et al. 2010). Conversely, an inaccurate B2 property, which inherently relies on stellar models with well-characterised systematic un-certainties, suggests that the underlying theoretical assumptions or input physics of the model under test require refinement. Fi-nally, anomalous B3 properties, which are derived from broad empirical relations, most likely reflect physical peculiarities or 

Article number, page 13 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms   

> Table 2. Crossmatch of PBS with P lato fields of view.

Field Total gold ⊂ silver ⊂ bronze Other LOPN1 285 (26%) 0 46 111 174 LOPS2 143 (13%) 3 15 27 116 Total 428 (39%) 3 61 138 290 

Note: gold : M, R, L = B1; silver : M, R = B1; bronze : ≥ 1 B1. The total count is bronze + Other. unique evolutionary states of the individual star that cause it to deviate from standard phenomenological calibrations. 

> 5.4. Caveats

We present several caveats and limitations concerning the cur-rent database, beginning with minor issues related to data rep-resentation. For unresolved binary or multiple star systems, the 

G and V magnitudes provided in the database refer to the to-tal apparent flux of the Gaia or Hipparcos source, as we have not computed the magnitudes of the individual components. Fur-thermore, we have not attempted to homogenise metallicity esti-mates onto a uniform solar abundance scale, and no distinction is made between literature values quoted as [Fe /H] or [M /H]. This simplification is justified as most targets have solar metallicities where both scales coincide. But this represents a key limitation when using the catalogue for stellar model validation and cross-survey comparisons. In particular, for metal-poor, α-enhanced stars, the resulting discrepancy in the bulk metallicity Z reaches up to ∼ 0.3 dex (Salaris et al. 1993). This is comparable to or ex-ceeds typical observational uncertainties and can systematically bias theoretical stellar models that rely on precise initial compo-sitions. Further developments to resolve these systematic scale off sets are discussed in the next section. Regarding astrometric parameters, the zero-point correction from Lindegren et al. (2021) has been applied to the Gaia DR3 parallaxes. However, because the calibration is limited to G ≥ 6, the correction computed for G = 6 was used for any sources brighter than this limit. This will have very little impact since the corrections are small relative to the large parallaxes of nearby stars. Similarly, for 6-parameter astrometric solutions with pseu-docolours outside the expected range of 1.24 to 1.72 magnitudes, the maximum corrections reached at these boundaries were ap-plied. For M dwarfs, the mass-luminosity relations used to as-sign B3 masses (e.g. Mann et al. 2019) are calibrated on nearby, largely solar-metallicity systems, with calibrations rarely ex-tending below [Fe /H] ≈ − 1.0 (e.g. Qiu et al. 2023). However, this limitation is mitigated by the very weak dependence of M-dwarf near-infrared (NIR) magnitudes on intrinsic metallicity. Indeed, stellar models confirm that the mass–NIR magnitude relation is practically independent of metallicity (Mann et al. 2019). A potentially more significant, though observationally untestable, source of systematic uncertainty in these relations lies in variations of the initial helium abundance and the helium-enrichment ratio. Calculations involving stellar rotation also carry underly-ing assumptions, as rotation periods are often estimated from the projected rotational velocity ( v sin i) or by assuming pseudo-synchronous rotation. Estimating the stellar radius from the or-bital period and v sin i explicitly assumes synchronous rotation, and the derived radius will be inaccurate if this assumption fails. This method also relies on highly accurate v sin i measurements. However, v sin i measurements are subject to systematic errors of 1 to 2 km s −1 for slow rotators due to the uncertainty in macro-turbulent broadening. Moving to detached eclipsing binary stars, Teff and metallic-ity measurements come from a wide variety of di ff erent analyt-ical techniques. Consequently, they are generally subject to sys-tematic errors that are di ffi cult to quantify, which can be larger than 200 K for Teff in the worst cases. The exception to this rule are direct Teff measurements that have been assigned a B1 bench-mark level, where the systematic error is small ( ∼10 K) and is already accounted for in the quoted standard error. While the authors have made an e ff ort to retain reliable high quality measurements in this work, direct interferometric mea-surements are not immune to systematic errors that could a ff ect the derived angular diameters and temperatures. A notable ex-ample is μ Cas A, where a re-reduction of archival interfero-metric data yielded an angular diameter that was 8% smaller, resulting in an e ff ective temperature 4% larger than previous estimates (Bond et al. 2020). Consequently, one must consider possible underlying systematic errors in Teff from interferome-try. In one study (Tayar et al. 2022) the authors estimated it to be around 2.4% for solar-type planet host stars, which tend to be small and faint, however more recent results (Nowacki et al., in prep.) point towards the ability to reach 2% accuracy of sim-ilar targets using a fidelity criterion on the quality of the data, multi-epoch, and polychromatic observations. They also show that systematics could be controlled to a level lower than 1%. The most fundamental limitation across all benchmark tar-gets arises from the absolute flux scale. There is a minimum un-certainty of approximately 1% in the flux scale for astronomi-cal sources across the near-UV to near-IR wavelengths, which is where late-type stars emit the bulk of their flux. Even if we assume an absolute minimum systematic uncertainty of 0.5% in the absolute flux scale, it dictates a minimum uncertainty in 

Teff of 0.125% (or 7.5 K for a 6000 K star), while older data prior to 2020 may carry additional o ff sets of up to 0.87% from the current CALSPEC flux scale (Bohlin et al. 2020, 2025). De-spite this, some published Teff and bolometric flux measurements quote unrealistically small uncertainties, sometimes as low as 

±1 K. While we have chosen to quote the original published val-ues and uncertainties in the database, we impose a strict min-imum uncertainty of 1% on fbol whenever it is used for sub-sequent calculations. This fundamentally propagates to a min-imum uncertainty of 0.25% in Teff (equivalent to a systematic uncertainty of ∼15 K for a 6000 K star) when computed from angular diameters and bolometric fluxes. These adopted floors are strongly supported by empirical validation studies compar-ing independent stellar radius and luminosity scales, which find similar baseline systematic limits (e.g. Stassun et al. 2017). Finally, it should be understood that if a star makes it to the catalogue, this does not imply that all properties are available, or have been studied in detail. The requirement is that we have at least one robust property in order for the star to be included. Ad-ditionally, some values of log g from spectroscopy do not have an assigned benchmark level because there was no straightfor-ward way for us to assess the accuracy of the published esti-mates. When these unassessed log g values are used to compute other properties (such as the stellar radius via Eq. A.3), the re-sulting derived properties likewise inherit an unassigned bench-mark level. 

> 5.5. Improvements and perspectives

The current catalogue includes data published up to May 2026; data from works published after this cuto ff date are not incorpo-         

> Article number, page 14 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars 10 −3
> 10 −2
> 10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> L [L  ⊙ ]Gold (15) Silver (179) Bronze (212) Other (428) 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> M[M ⊙]10 −1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> R [R  ⊙ ]Gold (15) Silver (180) Bronze (213) Other (435)
> −2.5
> −2.0
> −1.5
> −1.0
> −0.5 0.0 0.5 [Fe/H]
> Fig. 5. Mass-luminosity (top) and mass-radius (bottom) relations. Symbols as in Fig. 4.

rated in this release. During the work on establishing the PBS new observations along with new analyses resulted in several publications, for example Maxted (2025); Maxted et al. (2025), and these results made it into the current version of the catalogue. However, a number of other analyses are still ongoing, produc-ing further new results, which will be reflected in an updated catalogue. For example, for several stars, asteroseismic analyses have been conducted prior to the availability of high precision parallaxes, and re-analysing these stars, while also using more recent spectroscopic data is needed (Kaushik et al. to be subm. August). Other examples include obtaining homogenous bolo-metric flux estimations across the full sample or relevant sub-samples of data (Popa et al. in prep.). Other candidate bench-mark stars have also been identified that are not in the current catalogue because observations (and /or analyses) are currently in progress. Further updates will be made once the P lato data will be available. Below we describe some more specific im-provements. A major future priority is to elevate metallicity from an ancillary parameter to a formal benchmark property with de-fined quality levels. Due to the lack of model-independent (B1) methods, we could propose a two-tier benchmark classification: a B2 level for direct, high-resolution spectroscopic measure-ments, and a B3 level for estimates derived from photometric relations (particularly relevant for M dwarfs). The current ver-sion of the PBS database contains around 900 metallicity val-ues. A transition of metallicity to a benchmark property will re-quire to set all the metallicities on the same scale. Possible ap-proaches are to apply corrections to the literature values based on the solar reference used, or to conduct a homogeneous spec-troscopic analysis, following the strategy developed for the GBS (Casamiquela et al. 2026), see also Sect. 5.2. Either way will in-volve a considerable e ff ort from a dedicated team of experts. Recent progress has been made in visible interferometry at long baselines permitting to reach a much larger sample of dwarf stars for detailed analysis of their fundamental param-eters (Mourard et al. 2026). A new method for the determi-nation of the stellar radius, e ff ective temperature, and surface gravity, combining spectroscopy, photometry, and interferom-etry, and based on intensity profiles from MARCS stellar at-mosphere models (Ebrahimkutty et al. 2024), has been devel-oped. First results on a small sample of stars have been obtained (Ebrahimkutty et al. 2026) and a publication is in preparation with a sample of ∼40 stars for which fundamental parameters have been determined using interferometric polychromatic data, combined with spectroscopy and stellar atmosphere models. A catalogue of a few hundreds of stars is in preparation. Current interferometric surveys will also pave the way for determining the angular diameters of fainter stars – those be-yond the reach of direct interferometry – by refining the SBCRs across various regions of the HR diagram. The SBCR is a pow-erful empirical tool that allows the derivation of a star’s angu-lar diameter from its magnitudes in two distinct spectral bands. These relations are now widely used in multiple astrophysical 

> Article number, page 15

A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms 

contexts. For instance, they play a key role in the characteriza-tion of exoplanet host stars (Di Mauro et al. 2022) and in astero-seismology (Valle et al. 2024; Campante et al. 2019). They have also enabled unprecedentedly precise distance measurements to eclipsing binaries in the Large (Pietrzy´ nski et al. 2013, 2019) and Small Magellanic Clouds (Graczyk et al. 2020), achieving accuracies of 1% and 2%, respectively. Such results are of par-ticular importance for refining the Hubble–Lemaître constant (Riess et al. 2022). In the context of the P lato space mission, the SBCR in (V, V −K) colours, initially derived by Salsi et al. (2020) and later improved by Salsi et al. (2021), was first inte-grated into the P lato stellar analysis pipeline (Gent et al. 2022). However, it was subsequently decided to adopt Gaia bands, which provide significantly more precise magnitudes. This led to the use also of the recent SBCR developed by Kiman et al. (2024). Looking ahead, the goal is to calibrate a dedicated SBCR for P lato using homogeneous, multi-chromatic datasets from the CHARA interferometer (Mourard et al. 2026). Prelim-inary work has already begun, with initial results presented in Ibañez Bustos et al. (2025) and Ibañez Bustos et al. (2026). Ulti-mately, these calibrated SBCR will be used to derive the angular diameters for a future version of the P lato benchmark catalogue. For M dwarfs specifically, the same Kiman et al. (2024) sam-ple already adopted for the P lato SBCR pipeline also demon-strated a link between magnetic activity and radius inflation in single M dwarfs; extending the planned CHARA-based SBCR calibration (Mourard et al. 2026) to include metal-poor and low-activity M-dwarf targets would help disentangle this e ff ect from the metallicity bias a ff ecting the wide-binary calibration sample (Sect. 3.1), and move B3 mass and radius estimates for these cool dwarf stars toward B1. It is also possible, in principle, to derive the values of ( h′

> 1

, h′

> 2

)using long-baseline interferometry. To our knowledge, the only stars with data of su ffi cient quality to put useful constraints on the limb-darkening properties of F5-K7 dwarf or subgiant stars are α Cen A and α Cen B. Kervella et al. (2017) used measure-ments of the fringe visibilities out to the second or third lobe in their visibility function obtained with the VLTI /PIONIER in-terferometer in the H band to measure the angular diameters of both stars, and studied the sensitivity of their results to the as-sumed form of the limb-darkening law. There is some model dependence in these results on the assumed form of the limb-darkening law, so these measurements have a benchmark level of B2. However, these measurements are not directly relevant to the benchmarking of models for the P lato mission because they were observed in the near-infrared H band and so they are not in-cluded in our benchmark database. However, first measurements of limb darkening in the visible domain are now reachable with the SPICA instrument (see e.g. Ibrahimkutty et al. submitted, Bailleul et al. submitted). Concerning M dwarfs, the current PBS sample of stars in wide binary systems with FGK stars may be extended in fu-ture versions by selecting additional stars from the literature (e.g. Montes et al. 2018), for which dedicated spectroscopic ob-servations are currently being carried out to provide new, ho-mogeneous metallicity and α-element abundance determinations (Rains et al. in prep.). Additionally, we plan to incorporate a sample of ∼100 M dwarfs (11 ≤ G ≤ 15) in wide binaries con-tained in the scvPIC (Sect. 3.1.3 in Zwintz et al. 2026 and Morel 2025). Furthermore, wide binaries containing a main-sequence Plato target and a white dwarf companion off er a key testbed to validate asteroseismic ages of older field stars (Rebassa-Mansergas et al. 2021; Zwintz et al. 2026). We plan to determine the white dwarfs’ cooling ages using ground-based spectroscopy and photometry ( Teff and log g). These indepen-dent ages will calibrate the primaries’ seismic parameters and optimise theoretical model physics. Further planned future additions to the database include results from an asteroseismic analysis of β Aql based on SONG observations (Kjeldsen et al. 2025), the dynamical mass of μ1 Her Aa from Marcussen et al. (2026), asteroseismic param-eters, dynamical mass, and interferometric radius for χ Dra A (Rudrasingam et al., submitted), and asteroseismic parameters and dynamical mass of KIC 9693187 (Beck et al. 2026). 

6. Conclusions 

The initial P lato Benchmark Stars (PBS) catalogue compiles 1090 stars spanning a wide magnitude range from V = −1.5to G = 19 .8 mag. To support pipeline validation and calibra-tion, these targets are categorised into three high-precision qual-ity tiers: a gold sample of 15 stars possessing B1-level mass, radius, and luminosity; a silver sample of 195 stars with B1 mass and radius; and a bronze sample of 416 stars with at least one B1-level property. The remaining targets lack model-independent B1 parameters but are included because they fea-ture well-characterised model-dependent (B2) or empirical (B3) properties, significantly expanding the parameter space in tem-perature, gravity, and metallicity available for model testing. The celestial distribution of the entire sample is well-tailored for the mission’s footprints, including 285 benchmark stars in the Northern P lato field (LOPN1) and 143 stars within the South-ern P lato field (LOPS2). A web interface with a TAP service is available at https://astro.ulb.ac.be/pbs .                   

> Acknowledgements. We thank C. Loup and A. Oberto from Simbad /CDS for promptly updating the Simbad database to include any missing entries for the Plato benchmark stars. This work presents results from the European Space Agency (ESA) space mission P lato . The P lato payload, the P lato Ground Segment and P lato data processing are joint developments of ESA and the Plato Mission Consortium (PMC). Funding for the PMC is provided at na-tional levels, in particular by countries participating in the P lato Multilat-eral Agreement (Austria, Belgium, Czech Republic, Denmark, France, Ger-many, Italy, Netherlands, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Norway, and United Kingdom) and institutions from Brazil. Members of the P lato Consor-tium can be found at https://platomission.com/ . The ESA P lato mis-sion website is https://www.cosmos.esa.int/plato . We thank the teams working for P lato for all their work. T.Me. is granted by the BELSPO Bel-gian federal research program FED-tWIN under the research profile Prf-2020-033_BISTRO. U.H., N.M., and T.O. acknowledge support from the Swedish National Space Agency (SNSA /Rymdstyrelsen). MNL acknowledges support from the ESA PRODEX programme (PEA 4000142995). K.G.H. acknowl-edges support provided by the Polish National Science Center through grant no. 2023 /49 /B/ST9 /01671. P.M. acknowledges support from UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) research grant numbers ST /R000638 /1, ST /Y002563 /1 and UKRI1193, and UK Space Agency (UKSA) grant num-ber UKRI966. A.R.M. acknowledges support by the Spanish MICIU grant PID2023-148661NB-I00 and by the AGAUR /Generalitat de Catalunya grant SGR-386 /2021. G.N.P. acknowledges support from the Polish National Science Center through grant 2024 /53 /N/ST9 /03885. J.S. acknowledges support from STFC under grant number ST /Y002563 /1. B.R-A acknowledges funding support from the ANID Basal project FB210003. R.R. acknowledges support from Grant RYC2021-030837-I, funded by MCIN /AEI /10.13039 /501100011033 and by “European Union NextGeneration EU /PRTR”. This research has made use of the Simbad database, operated at CDS, Strasbourg, France (Wenger et al. 2000). This work has made use of data from the European Space Agency (ESA) mission Gaia
> (https://www.cosmos.esa.int/gaia ), processed by the Gaia Data Pro-cessing and Analysis Consortium (DPAC, https://www.cosmos.esa.int/ web/gaia/dpac/consortium ). Based on data obtained from the ESO Science Archive Facility with DOI https://doi.org/10.18727/archive/33 . This research has made use of the NASA Exoplanet Archive, which is operated by the California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aero-nautics and Space Administration under the Exoplanet Exploration Program. This research has made use of data obtained from the 4XMM XMM-Newton

Article number, page 16 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars 

serendipitous source catalogue compiled by the XMM-Newton Survey Science Centre consortium. 

References 

Akeson, R., Beichman, C., Kervella, P., Fomalont, E., & Benedict, G. F. 2021, AJ, 162, 14 Amarsi, A. M., Nordlander, T., Barklem, P. S., et al. 2018, A&A, 615, A139 Anderson, E. & Francis, C. 2012, Astronomy Letters, 38, 331 Anguiano, B., Majewski, S. R., Allende Prieto, C., et al. 2018, A&A, 620, A76 Armstrong, J. T., Hutter, D. J., Baines, E. K., et al. 2013, Journal of Astronomical Instrumentation, 2, 1340002 Baines, E. K., Thomas Armstrong, J., Clark, J. H., et al. 2021, AJ, 162, 198 Barnes, S. A. 2007, ApJ, 669, 1167 Bazot, M., Ireland, M. J., Huber, D., et al. 2011, A&A, 526, L4 Beck, P. G., Masseron, T., Pavlovski, K., et al. 2026, A&A, 706, L19 Bello-García, A., Passegger, V. M., Ordieres-Meré, J., et al. 2023, A&A, 673, A105 Benedict, G. F., Henry, T. J., Franz, O. G., et al. 2016, AJ, 152, 141 Berger, T. A., Huber, D., van Saders, J. L., et al. 2020, AJ, 159, 280 Bless, R. C. & Percival, J. W. 1997, IAU Symposium, 189, 73 Boden, A. F., Koresko, C. D., van Belle, G. T., et al. 1999, ApJ, 515, 356 Bohlin, R. C., Deustua, S., Narayan, G., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 40 Bohlin, R. C., Gordon, K. D., & Tremblay, P. E. 2014, PASP, 126, 711 Bohlin, R. C., Hubeny, I., & Rauch, T. 2020, AJ, 160, 21 Boller, T., Freyberg, M. J., Trümper, J., et al. 2016, A&A, 588, A103 Bonanno, A. & Fröhlich, H. E. 2015, A&A, 580, A130 Bond, H. E., Schaefer, G. H., Gilliland, R. L., & VandenBerg, D. A. 2020, ApJ, 904, 112 Bordé, P., Díaz, R. F., Creevey, O., et al. 2020, A&A, 635, A122 Boyajian, T. S., von Braun, K., van Belle, G., et al. 2012, ApJ, 757, 112 Brewer, J. M., Fischer, D. A., Valenti, J. A., & Piskunov, N. 2016, ApJS, 225, 32 Brown, R. H. 1968, ARA&A, 6, 13 Buder, S., Sharma, S., Kos, J., et al. 2021, VizieR Online Data Catalog: The GALAH + Survey DR3 (Buder +, 2021), VizieR On-line Data Catalog: J/MNRAS /506 /150. Originally published in: 2021MNRAS.506..150B Caballero, J. A., González-Álvarez, E., Brady, M., et al. 2022, A&A, 665, A120 Campante, T. L., Corsaro, E., Lund, M. N., et al. 2019, ApJ, 885, 31 Caramazza, M., Stelzer, B., Magaudda, E., et al. 2023, A&A, 676, A14 Casagrande, L., Lin, J., Rains, A. D., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 507, 2684 Casagrande, L., Portinari, L., & Flynn, C. 2006, MNRAS, 373, 13 Casagrande, L., Ramírez, I., Meléndez, J., Bessell, M., & Asplund, M. 2010, A&A, 512, A54 Casamiquela, L., Soubiran, C., Jofré, P., et al. 2026, A&A, 705, A167 Catelan, M. 2018, in IAU Symposium, Vol. 334, Rediscovering Our Galaxy, ed. C. Chiappini, I. Minchev, E. Starkenburg, & M. Valentini, 11–20 Cayrel, R., Hill, V., Beers, T. C., et al. 2001, Nature, 409, 691 Chaplin, W. J., Lund, M. N., Handberg, R., et al. 2015, PASP, 127, 1038 Char, S., Foing, B. H., Beckman, J., Garcia Lopez, R. J., & Rebolo, R. 1993, A&A, 276, 78 Chelli, A., Duvert, G., Bourgès, L., et al. 2016, A&A, 589, A112 Choi, J., Dotter, A., Conroy, C., et al. 2016, ApJ, 823, 102 Cifuentes, C., Caballero, J. A., Cortés-Contreras, M., et al. 2020, A&A, 642, A115 Claytor, Z. R., van Saders, J. L., Santos, Â. R. G., et al. 2020, ApJ, 888, 43 Connelly, J. N., Bollard, J., & Bizzarro, M. 2017, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 201, 345 Creevey, O. L., Doˇ gan, G., Frasca, A., et al. 2012a, A&A, 537, A111 Creevey, O. L., Metcalfe, T. S., Schultheis, M., et al. 2017, A&A, 601, A67 Creevey, O. L., Thévenin, F., Basu, S., et al. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 2419 Creevey, O. L., Thévenin, F., Boyajian, T. S., et al. 2012b, A&A, 545, A17 Davies, G. R., Silva Aguirre, V., Bedding, T. R., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 456, 2183 Di Mauro, M. P., Reda, R., Mathur, S., et al. 2022, ApJ, 940, 93 Díaz, R. F., Delfosse, X., Hobson, M. J., et al. 2019, A&A, 625, A17 Díez Alonso, E., Caballero, J. A., Montes, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 621, A126 do Nascimento, J.-D., Barnes, S. A., Saar, S. H., et al. 2023, ApJ, 958, 57 Doyle, L. R., Carter, J. A., Fabrycky, D. C., et al. 2011, Science, 333, 1602 Ebrahimkutty, N., Gent, M. R., Mourard, D., et al. 2024, A&A, 691, A207 Ebrahimkutty, N., Mourard, D., & Berio, P. 2026, A&A, in press Edvardsson, B., Andersen, J., Gustafsson, B., et al. 1993, A&A, 275, 101 Eker, Z., Bakı¸ s, V., Bilir, S., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 5491 Ellis, T. G. 2022, PhD thesis, LSU Doctoral Dissertations, 5845 Engle, S. G. & Guinan, E. F. 2023, ApJ, 954, L50 Fitzpatrick, J., Maxted, P. F. L., Freckelton, A. V., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 537, 3943 Gaia Collaboration. 2022, VizieR Online Data Catalog: Gaia DR3 Part 1. Main source (Gaia Collaboration, 2022), VizieR On-line Data Catalog: I /355. Orig-inally published in: 2023A&A...674A...1G; doi:10.1051 /0004-63 Gaia Collaboration, Creevey, O. L., Sarro, L. M., et al. 2023a, A&A, 674, A39 Gaia Collaboration, Vallenari, A., Brown, A. G. A., et al. 2023b, A&A, 674, A1 Gallenne, A., Mérand, A., Kervella, P., et al. 2023, A&A, 672, A119 Gallenne, A., Pietrzy´ nski, G., Graczyk, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 632, A31 Gent, M. R., Bergemann, M., Serenelli, A., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A147 Giribaldi, R. E., da Silva, A. R., Smiljanic, R., & Cornejo Espinoza, D. 2021, A&A, 650, A194 Giribaldi, R. E., Ubaldo-Melo, M. L., Porto de Mello, G. F., et al. 2019, A&A, 624, A10 Giribaldi, R. E., Van Eck, S., Merle, T., et al. 2023, A&A, 679, A110 Goupil, M. J., Catala, C., Samadi, R., et al. 2024, A&A, 683, A78 Graczyk, D., Pietrzy´ nski, G., Galan, C., et al. 2021, A&A, 649, A109 Graczyk, D., Pietrzy´ nski, G., Thompson, I. B., et al. 2020, ApJ, 904, 13 Graczyk, D., Smolec, R., Pavlovski, K., et al. 2016, A&A, 594, A92 Haguenauer, P., Alonso, J., Bourget, P., et al. 2010, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 7734, Optical and Infrared Interferometry II, ed. W. C. Danchi, F. Delplancke, & J. K. Ra-jagopal, 773404 Hallam, K. L., Altner, B., & Endal, A. S. 1991, ApJ, 372, 610 Hatt, E., Nielsen, M. B., Chaplin, W. J., et al. 2023, A&A, 669, A67 Heiter, U., Jofré, P., Gustafsson, B., et al. 2015, A&A, 582, A49 Hekker, S. 2020, Frontiers in Astronomy and Space Sciences, 7, 3 Hełminiak, K. G., Brahm, R., Ratajczak, M., et al. 2014, A&A, 567, A64 Huber, D., Bedding, T. R., Stello, D., et al. 2011, ApJ, 743, 143 Hunt, E. L. & Re ff ert, S. 2023, A&A, 673, A114 Ibañez Bustos, R. V., Buccino, A. P., Nardetto, N., et al. 2025, A&A, 696, A230 Ibañez Bustos, R. V., Mourard, D., Nardetto, N., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2608.30557 Je ff ries, R. D., Naylor, T., Mayne, N. J., Bell, C. P. M., & Littlefair, S. P. 2013, MNRAS, 434, 2438 Jofré, P., Heiter, U., & Soubiran, C. 2019, ARA&A, 57, 571 Kaluzny, J., Thompson, I. B., Dotter, A., et al. 2014, Acta Astron., 64, 11 Kervella, P., Bigot, L., Gallenne, A., & Thévenin, F. 2017, A&A, 597, A137 Kim, Y.-C., Demarque, P., Yi, S. K., & Alexander, D. R. 2002, ApJS, 143, 499 Kiman, R., Brandt, T. D., Faherty, J. K., & Popinchalk, M. 2024, AJ, 168, 126 Kirkby-Kent, J. A., Maxted, P. F. L., Serenelli, A. M., et al. 2016, A&A, 591, A124 Kjeldsen, H., Bedding, T. R., Li, Y., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A39 Kostov, V. B., Orosz, J. A., Feinstein, A. D., et al. 2020, AJ, 159, 253 Kraus, A. L., Douglas, S. T., Mann, A. W., et al. 2017, ApJ, 845, 72 Lebreton, Y., Goupil, M. J., & Montalbán, J. 2014a, in EAS Publications Se-ries, Vol. 65, EAS Publications Series, ed. Y. Lebreton, D. Valls-Gabaud, & C. Charbonnel (EDP), 99–176 Lebreton, Y., Goupil, M. J., & Montalbán, J. 2014b, in EAS Publications Se-ries, Vol. 65, EAS Publications Series, ed. Y. Lebreton, D. Valls-Gabaud, & C. Charbonnel (EDP), 177–223 Lebreton, Y. & Reese, D. R. 2020, A&A, 642, A88 Lindegren, L., Bastian, U., Biermann, M., et al. 2021, A&A, 649, A4 Lund, M. N., Basu, S., Bieryla, A., et al. 2024, A&A, 688, A13 Lund, M. N., Chaplin, W. J., Casagrande, L., et al. 2016, PASP, 128, 124204 Lund, M. N., Chontos, A., Grundahl, F., et al. 2025, A&A, 701, A285 Lund, M. N., Knudstrup, E., Silva Aguirre, V., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 248 Lund, M. N., Silva Aguirre, V., Davies, G. R., et al. 2017, ApJ, 835, 172 Maldonado, J., Micela, G., Baratella, M., et al. 2020, A&A, 644, A68 Mamajek, E. E. & Hillenbrand, L. A. 2008, ApJ, 687, 1264 Mann, A. W., Dupuy, T., Kraus, A. L., et al. 2019, ApJ, 871, 63 Mann, A. W., Feiden, G. A., Gaidos, E., Boyajian, T., & von Braun, K. 2015, ApJ, 804, 64 Marcussen, M. L. & Albrecht, S. H. 2022, ApJ, 933, 227 Marcussen, M. L., Albrecht, S. H., Winn, J. N., et al. 2024, ApJ, 975, 149 Marcussen, M. L., Lund, M. N., Grundahl, F., et al. 2026, A&A, 709, A145 Marfil, E., Tabernero, H. M., Montes, D., et al. 2021, A&A, 656, A162 Mathur, S., García, R. A., Breton, S., et al. 2022, A&A, 657, A31 Mathur, S., Metcalfe, T. S., Woitaszek, M., et al. 2012, ApJ, 749, 152 Maxted, P. F. L. 2023a, MNRAS, 522, 2683 Maxted, P. F. L. 2023b, MNRAS, 519, 3723 Maxted, P. F. L. 2025, MNRAS, 539, 3741 Maxted, P. F. L., Gaulme, P., Graczyk, D., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 498, 332 Maxted, P. F. L., Miller, N. J., Baycroft, T. A., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 544, 4611 Maxted, P. F. L., Miller, N. J., Hoyer, S., et al. 2022, MNRAS, 513, 6042 Maxted, P. F. L., Miller, N. J., Sebastian, D., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 531, 4577 Maxted, P. F. L., Triaud, A. H. M. J., & Martin, D. V. 2023, Universe, 9, 498 Meléndez, J., Bergemann, M., Cohen, J. G., et al. 2012, A&A, 543, A29 Merloni, A., Lamer, G., Liu, T., et al. 2024, A&A, 682, A34 Metcalfe, T. S., Townsend, R. H. D., & Ball, W. H. 2023, Research Notes of the American Astronomical Society, 7, 164 Miller, N. J., Maxted, P. F. L., Graczyk, D., Tan, T. G., & Southworth, J. 2022, MNRAS, 517, 5129 Miller, N. J., Maxted, P. F. L., Hahlin, A., & Graczyk, D. 2026, MNRAS, 545, staf2078 

Article number, page 17 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms 

Miller, N. J., Maxted, P. F. L., & Smalley, B. 2020, MNRAS, 497, 2899 Mohr, P. J., Newell, D. B., Taylor, B. N., & Tiesinga, E. 2025, Reviews of Mod-ern Physics, 97, 025002 Montalto, M., Piotto, G., Marrese, P. M., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.03369 Montes, D., González-Peinado, R., Tabernero, H. M., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 1332 Morel, T. 2018, A&A, 615, A172 Morel, T. 2025, Wide stellar binaries as a validation sample for PLATO, PLATO Technical Note, PLATO-ULG-PSM-TN-0089 Morel, T., Creevey, O. L., Montalbán, J., Miglio, A., & Willett, E. 2021, A&A, 646, A78 Mourard, D., Bério, P., Bailet, C., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2609.02406 Moya, A., Zuccarino, F., Chaplin, W. J., & Davies, G. R. 2018, ApJS, 237, 21 Nagarajan, P. & El-Badry, K. 2024, PASP, 136, 094203 Nascimbeni, V., Piotto, G., Börner, A., et al. 2022, A&A, 658, A31 Nascimbeni, V., Piotto, G., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, A&A, 694, A313 Nissen, P. E., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Mosumgaard, J. R., et al. 2020, A&A, 640, A81 Olander, T., Gent, M. R., Heiter, U., et al. 2025a, A&A, 696, A62 Olander, T., Heiter, U., Piskunov, N., Köhler, J., & Kochukhov, O. 2025b, A&A, 698, A289 Passegger, V. M., Schweitzer, A., Shulyak, D., et al. 2019, A&A, 627, A161 Pietrzy´ nski, G., Graczyk, D., Gallenne, A., et al. 2019, Nature, 567, 200 Pietrzy´ nski, G., Graczyk, D., Gieren, W., et al. 2013, Nature, 495, 76 Pinsonneault, M. H., Elsworth, Y. P., Tayar, J., et al. 2018, ApJS, 239, 32 Pourbaix, D. & Bo ffi n, H. M. J. 2003, A&A, 398, 1163 Pourbaix, D. & Bo ffi n, H. M. J. 2016, A&A, 586, A90 Prša, A., Harmanec, P., Torres, G., et al. 2016, AJ, 152, 41 Qiu, D., Tian, H., Li, J., et al. 2023, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 23, 055008 Rabus, M., Lachaume, R., Jordán, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 484, 2674 Rains, A. D., Nordlander, T., Monty, S., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 529, 3171 Rains, A. D., Žerjal, M., Ireland, M. J., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 504, 5788 Ratajczak, M., Pawłaszek, R. K., Hełminiak, K. G., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 500, 4972 Rauer, H., Aerts, C., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26 Rauer, H., Catala, C., Aerts, C., et al. 2014, Experimental Astronomy, 38, 249 Rebassa-Mansergas, A., Maldonado, J., Raddi, R., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 505, 3165 Rebassa-Mansergas, A., Tejero-Gómez, I., & Raddi, R. 2026, A&A, 709, A250 Reiners, A., Shulyak, D., Käpylä, P. J., et al. 2022, A&A, 662, A41 Rice, M. & Brewer, J. M. 2020, ApJ, 898, 119 Riess, A. G., Yuan, W., Macri, L. M., et al. 2022, ApJ, 934, L7 Rosat, C. 2000, VizieR Online Data Catalog: Second ROSAT PSPC Catalog (ROSAT, 2000), VizieR On-line Data Catalog: IX /30. Originally published in: ROSAT News 72, 25-May-2000 (2000) Rossiter, R. A. 1924, ApJ, 60, 15 Salaris, M., Chie ffi , A., & Straniero, O. 1993, ApJ, 414, 580 Salmon, S. J. A. J., Van Grootel, V., Buldgen, G., Dupret, M.-A., & Eggenberger, P. 2021, A&A, 646, A7 Salsi, A., Nardetto, N., Mourard, D., et al. 2020, A&A, 640, A2 Salsi, A., Nardetto, N., Mourard, D., et al. 2021, A&A, 652, A26 Schaefer, G. H., White, R. J., Baines, E. K., et al. 2018, ApJ, 858, 71 Schweitzer, A., Passegger, V. M., Cifuentes, C., et al. 2019, A&A, 625, A68 Serenelli, A., Johnson, J., Huber, D., et al. 2017, ApJS, 233, 23 Serenelli, A., Weiss, A., Aerts, C., et al. 2021, A&A Rev., 29, 4 Shah, S. P., Ezzeddine, R., Ji, A. P., et al. 2023, ApJ, 948, 122 Shan, Y., Revilla, D., Skrzypinski, S. L., et al. 2024, A&A, 684, A9 Silva Aguirre, V., Lund, M. N., Antia, H. M., et al. 2017, ApJ, 835, 173 Soderblom, D. R. 2010, ARA&A, 48, 581 Soubiran, C., Brouillet, N., & Casamiquela, L. 2022, VizieR Online Data Catalog: Mean PASTEL atmospheric parameters (Soubiran +, 2022), VizieR On-line Data Catalog: J/A+A/663 /A4. Originally published in: 2022A&A...663A...4S Soubiran, C., Creevey, O. L., Lagarde, N., et al. 2024, A&A, 682, A145 Sousa, S. G., Santos, N. C., Mayor, M., et al. 2008, A&A, 487, 373 Southworth, J. 2015, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 496, Living Together: Planets, Host Stars and Binaries, ed. S. M. Rucin-ski, G. Torres, & M. Zejda, 164 Southworth, J., Smalley, B., Maxted, P. F. L., Claret, A., & Etzel, P. B. 2005, MNRAS, 363, 529 Souto, D., Cunha, K., Smith, V. V., et al. 2022, ApJ, 927, 123 Spejcher, B., Martin, D. V., Pandina, J., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2511.23430 Stassun, K. G., Collins, K. A., & Gaudi, B. S. 2017, AJ, 153, 136 Stassun, K. G., Corsaro, E., Pepper, J. A., & Gaudi, B. S. 2018, AJ, 155, 22 Stassun, K. G. & Torres, G. 2016, AJ, 152, 180 Suárez Mascareño, A., Rebolo, R., & González Hernández, J. I. 2016, A&A, 595, A12 Suárez Mascareño, A., Rebolo, R., González Hernández, J. I., & Esposito, M. 2015, MNRAS, 452, 2745 Suárez Mascareño, A., Rebolo, R., González Hernández, J. I., et al. 2018, A&A, 612, A89 Sybilski, P., Pawłaszek, R. K., Sybilska, A., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 478, 1942 Tayar, J., Claytor, Z. R., Huber, D., & van Saders, J. 2022, ApJ, 927, 31 ten Brummelaar, T. A., McAlister, H. A., Ridgway, S. T., et al. 2005, ApJ, 628, 453 Torres, G., Andersen, J., & Giménez, A. 2010, A&A Rev., 18, 67 Valenti, J. A. & Fischer, D. A. 2005, ApJS, 159, 141 Valle, G., Dell’Omodarme, M., Prada Moroni, P. G., & Degl’Innocenti, S. 2023, A&A, 678, A203 Valle, G., Dell’Omodarme, M., Prada Moroni, P. G., & Degl’Innocenti, S. 2024, A&A, 690, A327 Van Eylen, V., Lund, M. N., Silva Aguirre, V., et al. 2014, ApJ, 782, 14 van Leeuwen, F. 2007, A&A, 474, 653 VandenBerg, D. A. & Clem, J. L. 2003, AJ, 126, 778 Vergely, J. L., Lallement, R., & Cox, N. L. J. 2022, A&A, 664, A174 Verma, K., Maxted, P. F. L., Singh, A., Ludwig, H. G., & Sable, Y. 2024, MN-RAS, 534, 3893 Viani, L. S., Basu, S., Chaplin, W. J., Davies, G. R., & Elsworth, Y. 2017, ApJ, 843, 11 von Braun, K., Boyajian, T. S., Kane, S. R., et al. 2012, ApJ, 753, 171 von Braun, K., Boyajian, T. S., Kane, S. R., et al. 2011, ApJ, 729, L26 von Braun, K., Boyajian, T. S., van Belle, G. T., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 438, 2413 Webb, N. A., Coriat, M., Traulsen, I., et al. 2020, A&A, 641, A136 Wenger, M., Ochsenbein, F., Egret, D., et al. 2000, A&AS, 143, 9 Yi, S. K., Kim, Y.-C., & Demarque, P. 2003, ApJS, 144, 259 Zhou, J., Bi, S., Yu, J., et al. 2024a, ApJS, 271, 17 Zhou, Y., Christensen-Dalsgaard, J., Asplund, M., et al. 2024b, ApJ, 962, 118 Zhu, E. & Preibisch, T. 2025, A&A, 694, A93 Zolotukhin, I. Y., Bachetti, M., Sartore, N., Chilingarian, I. V., & Webb, N. A. 2017, ApJ, 839, 125 Zwintz, K., Aerts, C., Tkachenko, A., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.04042  

> 1

BLU-ULB, Institut d’Astronomie et d’Astrophysique, Université Libre de Bruxelles, CP 226, Bvd du Triomphe, Belgium, e-mail: thibault.merle@ulb.be , www.ulb.be  

> 2

Royal Observatory of Belgium, Avenue Circulaire 3, 1180 Brussels, Belgium  

> 3

Astrophysics group, Keele University, Sta ff ordshire, ST5 5BG, UK  

> 4

Université Côte d’Azur, Observatoire de la Côte d’Azur, CNRS, Laboratoire Lagrange, France  

> 5

Observational Astrophysics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University, Box 524, SE-751 20 Uppsala, Sweden  

> 6

Institut d’Astrophysique Spatiale (IAS), CNRS, Université Paris-Saclay, Orsay,91400, France  

> 7

Stellar Astrophysics Centre, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Aarhus University, Ny Munkegade 120, Denmark  

> 8

Nicolaus Copernicus Astronomical Center, Polish Academy of Sci-ences, ul. Rabia´ nska 8, 87-100 Toru´ n, Poland  

> 9

Instituto de Alta Investigación, Universidad de Tarapacá, Casilla 7D, Arica, Chile  

> 10

INAF – Osservatorio Astrofisico di Arcetri, Largo E. Fermi 5, 50125 Firenze, Italy  

> 11

STAR Institute, Université de Liège, Quartier Agora, Allée du 6 Août 19c, Bât. B5C, 4000 Liège, Belgium  

> 12

LESIA, Observatoire de Paris, Université PSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, 5 place Jules Janssen, 92195 Meudon, France  

> 13

Heidelberg Institute for Theoretical Studies, Heidelberg, Germany  

> 14

Instituto de Estudios Astrofísicos, Universidad Diego Portales, Av. Ejército Libertador 441, Santiago de Chile  

> 15

Departament de Física, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, c / Es-teve Terrades 5, 08860 Castelldefels, Spain  

> 16

Institut d’Estudis Espacials de Catalunya, c / Esteve Terradas, 1, Ed-ifici RDIT, Campus PMT-UPC, 08860 Castelldefels, Spain  

> 17

INAF – Astronomical Observatory of Abruzzo, Via M. Maggini, sn, 64100 Teramo, Italy  

> 18

INFN, Sezione di Pisa, Largo Pontecorvo 3, 56127 Pisa, Italy  

> 19

Instituto de Astrofísica, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile, Av. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, 782-0436 Macul, Santiago, Chile  

> 20

Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte (UFRN), Departa-mento de Física, 59078-970, Natal, RN, Brazil Article number, page 18 Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars 

Appendix A: Stellar parameters relations and uncertainties 

– Stellar radius R from angular diameter θLD and from parallax 

ϖ:

RR⊙

= 12

θLD 

ϖ

au 

R⊙

(A.1) where θLD and ϖ are in units of mas, and the solar radius 

R⊙ and the astronomical unit, au, are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆RR =

s

∆θLD 

θLD 

!2

+ ∆ϖϖ

!2

(A.2) 

– Stellar radius R from stellar mass M and log g:

RR⊙

= 10 − 12 (log g−log g⊙)

s

MM⊙

(A.3) where the solar radius R⊙, surface gravity log g⊙ and mass 

M⊙ are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncer-tainty is given by: 

∆RR = 12

s

∆MM

!2

+ (ln 10 ∆ log g)2 (A.4) 

– Angular diameter θLD from stellar radius R and parallax ϖ:

θLD = 2ϖR R⊙

au (A.5) where ϖ are in units of mas, R in solar units, and R⊙ and the astronomical unit, au, are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆θLD 

θLD 

=

s

∆RR

!2

+ ∆ϖϖ

!2

(A.6) 

– Surface gravity log g from stellar mass M and radius R:log g = log g⊙ + log MM⊙

− 2 log RR⊙

(A.7) where the solar surface gravity log g⊙, mass M⊙ and radius 

R⊙ are given in Table B.1. The associated absolute uncer-tainty in log g (corresponding to the relative uncertainty in g)is given by: 

∆ log g = 1ln 10 

s

∆MM

!2

+ 2 ∆RR

!2

(A.8) 

– Stellar mass M from surface gravity log g and radius R:

MM⊙

= 10 (log g−log g⊙) RR⊙

!2

(A.9) where the solar mass M⊙, surface gravity log g⊙, and radius 

R⊙ are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆MM =

s ln 10 ∆ log g2 + 2 ∆RR

!2

(A.10) 

– The logarithm of the mean stellar density ⟨ρ⟩ from stellar mass M and radius R:log ⟨ρ⟩⟨ρ⟩⊙

!

= log MM⊙

!

− 3 log RR⊙

!

(A.11) where the solar mean density ⟨ρ⟩⊙, mass M⊙ and radius R⊙

are given in Table B.1. The associated absolute uncertainty in the logarithm (relative uncertainty in ⟨ρ⟩) is given by: 

∆ log ⟨ρ⟩⟨ρ⟩⊙

!

= 1ln 10 

s

∆MM

!2

+ 3 ∆RR

!2

(A.12) 

– Luminosity L from bolometric flux fbol and from parallax ϖ:

LL⊙

= 1.679616 × 10 7

π

 au 

ϖ

2 fbol 

L⊙

(A.13) where fbol is expressed in 10 −11 W m −2 or equivalently in 10 −8 erg s −1 cm −2 and ϖ in mas. The solar luminosity L⊙,and the astronomical unit, au, are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆LL =

s

2 ∆ϖϖ

!2

+ ∆ fbol 

fbol 

!2

(A.14) 

– Luminosity L from e ff ective temperature Teff and radius R:

LL⊙

= RR⊙

!2 Teff 

T ⊙

> eff

!4

(A.15) where the solar luminosity L⊙, radius R⊙ and e ff ective tem-perature Teff ⊙ are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆LL =

s

2 ∆RR

!2

+ 4 ∆Teff 

Teff 

!2

(A.16) 

– Bolometric flux fbol from luminosity L and parallax ϖ:

fbol = π

1.679616 × 10 7

 ϖ

au 

2 LL⊙

!

L⊙ (A.17) where fbol is expressed in 10 −11 W m −2 or equivalently in 10 −8 erg s −1 cm −2 and ϖ in mas. The solar luminosity L⊙,and the astronomical unit, au, are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆ fbol 

fbol 

=

s

∆LL

!2

+ 2 ∆ϖϖ

!2

(A.18) 

– Eff ective temperature Teff from angular diameter θLD and bolometric flux fbol :

Teff = 10 −11 fbol 

σSB 

!1/4  θLD 

2 · 3.6 × 10 6

π

180 

−1/2

(A.19) where Teff is in K, fbol is expressed in 10 −11 W m −2 or equiv-alently in 10 −8 erg s −1 cm −2 and θLD in mas, and the Stefan-Boltzmann constant σSB is given in Table B.1. The associ-ated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆Teff 

Teff 

=

s

14

∆ fbol 

fbol 

!2

+ 12

∆θLD 

θLD 

!2

(A.20) 

Article number, page 19 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms 

– Eff ective temperature Teff from luminosity L and radius R:

Teff =

 R⊙

R

1/2 LL⊙

!1/4

T ⊙ 

> eff

(A.21) where the solar radius R⊙, luminosity L⊙, and e ff ective tem-perature Teff ⊙ are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆Teff 

Teff 

=

s

12

∆RR

!2

+ 14

∆LL

!2

(A.22) 

– Radius from logarithm of the mean stellar density ⟨ρ⟩ and mass, M:log RR⊙

!

= 13 log MM⊙

!

− 13 log ⟨ρ⟩⟨ρ⟩⊙

!

(A.23) where the solar mean density ¯ ρ⊙, mass M⊙ and radius R⊙

are given in Table B.1. The associated relative uncertainty is given by: 

∆RR =

s

∆M

3M

!2

+ ln 10 ∆ log( ⟨ρ⟩/⟨ρ⟩⊙)3

!2

(A.24) 

Appendix B: Reference constant values Appendix C: Data compilations Appendix D: X-ray properties of M dwarfs Appendix E: The gold sample Appendix F: Distribution of benchmark stellar properties 

> Article number, page 20

Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars 

Table B.1. Reference constant values. 

Physical property Symbol Value Unit Reference Solar mass parameter GM ⊙ 1.3271244 ×10 20 m3s−2 (1) Solar mass M⊙ 1.98841 ×10 30 kg (2) Solar radius R⊙ 6.957 ×10 8 m (1) Solar luminosity L⊙ 3.828 ×10 26 W (1) Solar e ff ective temperature Teff ⊙ 5772 K (1) Solar surface gravity log g⊙ 4.4381 log cm s −2 (3) Solar mean density ⟨ρ⟩⊙ 1410 kg m −3 (4) Newtonian constant of gravitation G 6.67430 ×10 −11 m3kg −1s−2 (5) Astronomical unit of length au 1.49597870700 ×10 11 m (6) Parsec pc 3.08567758147 ×10 16 m (7) Stefan-Boltzmann constant σSB 5.670374419 ×10 −8 Wm −2K−4 (5) Solar frequency at maximum power νmax ,⊙ 3090 μHz (8) Solar large frequency separation ∆ν⊙ 135.1 μHz (8) 

References. (1) Resolution B3 adopted at IAU General Assembly 2015 (Prša et al. 2016); (2) calculated from GM ⊙ and G; (3) calculated from 

GM ⊙ and R⊙; (4) calculated from M⊙ and R⊙; (5) 2022 CODATA recommended value (Mohr et al. 2025); (6) Resolution B2 adopted at IAU General Assembly 2012; (7) calculated from au; (8) from Huber et al. (2011). 

Table C.1. Summary of the observational data compilations used to construct the P lato benchmark stars database, organized by primary mea-surement method. The table lists the target types, the number of stars included ( N), and the resulting benchmark properties with their assessed levels. Source Stellar type N Primary method Properties (level) 

Binary and multiple systems 

DEBCat (Southworth 2015) Detached EBs 159 EB + SB2 M (B1), R (B1) Araucaria Project (Gallenne et al. 2023) Detached EBs 10 Orbital parallax + SB2 M (B1) EBLM Systems (Maxted et al. 2023; Maxted 2025) EBs with low-mass secondary 36 Transit light curves +

SB1 

⟨ρ⟩ (B1), R (B1 /B2) Review on masses (Serenelli et al. 2021) Visual and detached binaries 110 Dynamical masses M (B1) M dwarfs in wide binaries (e.g., Rains et al. 2021; Olander et al. 2025a) M dwarf companions 26 Empirical relations M (B3), R (B3), Teff 

(B2), [Fe /H] 

Interferometry and astrometry 

GBS v3 (Soubiran et al. 2024) FGK main sequence & subgiant stars 105 Interferometry +

Parallax 

Teff (B1), R (B1), L (B1) M-dwarf compilation (e.g., Boyajian et al. 2012; Rabus et al. 2019) M dwarfs 39 Interferometry R (B1), Teff (B1) 

Asteroseismic samples 

Gaia -Kepler properties (Berger et al. 2020) FGK dwarfs 29 Asteroseismology +

Photometry 

M (B2), R (B2), τ (B2) APOGEE-Kepler (Claytor et al. 2020) Cool dwarfs 19 Asteroseismology +

Spectroscopy 

M (B2), R (B2), τ (B2) KEYSTONE sample (Lund et al. 2016, 2024) Dwarf & subgiant oscillators 170 Asteroseismology M (B2), R (B2), τ (B2) 

Large surveys 

Titans I & II (Giribaldi et al. 2021, 2023) Metal-poor dwarfs & red giants 55 3D non-LTE Hα fitting Teff (B2) SPOCS catalogue (Valenti & Fischer 2005) Bright FGK dwarfs 9 Spectroscopy +

Isochrones 

τ (B2), M (B2) 

Gaia DR3 Golden Sample (Gaia Collaboration et al. 2023a) FGKM dwarfs and subgiants, incl. solar analogues 131 High-res Spectroscopy Teff , log g, [Fe /H] 

Notes. N represents the number of stars strictly fulfilling the P lato core mission requirements that were selected from the parent catalogues. Article number, page 21 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms  

> Table D.1. X-ray properties of benchmark M dwarfs.

Primary ID Alternative ID CX σ(CX ) log( fX / fbol ) σ(log( fX / fbol )) Source Stars in the interferometry sample V* GX And GJ 15A 0.288 0.026 −4.51 0.04 2RXS HD 36395 GJ 205 . . . . . . −4.97 0.06 ZP2025 HD 79210 GJ 338A . . . . . . −4.22 0.5 R+2022 HD 79211 GJ 338B . . . . . . −4.69 0.5 R+2022 TYC 3012-2528-1 BD +44 2051A . . . . . . −5.4 0.1 ZP2025 V* FI Vir Ross 128 . . . . . . −4.8 0.1 ZP2025 HD 119850 GJ 526 . . . . . . −5.5 0.1 ZP2025 TYC 4428-1943-1 BD +68 946 . . . . . . −4.83 0.03 ZP2025 HD 173740 GJ 725B . . . . . . −4.62 0.05 ZP2025 V* V1428 Aql HD 180617 . . . . . . −5.32 0.01 ZP2025 HD 199305 GJ 809 . . . . . . −4.84 0.05 ZP2025 HD 216899 GJ 880 . . . . . . −5.17 0.5 R+2022 HD 95735 GJ 411 1.9007 0.0091 −4.574 0.003 4XMM HD 285968 GJ 176 . . . . . . −5.28 0.03 ZP2025 TYC 1984-2613-1 Ross 905 . . . . . . −5.71 0.04 ZP2025 V* HO Lib BD-07 4003 . . . . . . −5.22 0.03 ZP2025 TYC 2063-479-1 BD +25 3173 . . . . . . −3.64 0.5 R+2022 V* V2500 Oph Barnard’s star 0.0234 0.0026 −5.40 0.05 2RXP V* IL Aqr BD-15 6290 . . . . . . −4.83 0.02 ZP2025 HD 225213 GJ 1 0.0197 0.0024 −5.52 0.05 2RXP TYC 246-1068-1 BD +01 2447 . . . . . . −5.1 0.1 ZP2025 * alf Cen C Proxima Centauri 5.475 0.013 −3.58 0.03 4XMM TYC 8346-37-1 CD-46 11540 . . . . . . −4.19 0.01 ZP2025 HD 204961 GJ 832 0.0850 0.0021 −5.46 0.02 4XMM TYC 173-3208-1 BD +05 1668 . . . . . . −5.41 0.01 ZP2025 V* V2306 Oph BD-12 4523 . . . . . . −5.09 0.5 R+2022 V* V1216 Sgr Ross 154 . . . . . . −3.34 0.01 ZP2025 HD 217987 GJ 887 . . . . . . −4.95 0.01 ZP2025 TYC 882-1111-1 Wolf 437 0.00672 0.00071 −5.81 0.05 4XMM HD 265866 GJ 251 . . . . . . −5.4 0.2 ZP2025 TYC 1978-1286-1 Ross 104 . . . . . . −5.0 0.1 ZP2025 TYC 3878-1193-1 G 202-48 . . . . . . −4.88 0.04 ZP2025 HD 165222 GJ 701 . . . . . . −5.0 0.2 ZP2025 HD 209290 GJ 846 . . . . . . −5.27 0.5 R+2022 V* EV Lac GJ 873 11.373 0.027 −3.01 0.01 4XMM V* EQ Peg A BD +19 5116A . . . . . . −2.78 0.5 R+2022 V* HH And Ross 248 . . . . . . −3.75 0.06 ZP2025 V* BR Psc GJ 908 . . . . . . −5.2 0.1 ZP2025 Stars in the wide-binary sample V* BX Cet GJ 105B . . . . . . −4.5 . . . ZP2025 TYC 1598-325-1 Ross 730 0.002 . . . −6.3 . . . C+2023 HD 349726 GJ 745B 0.015 0.005 −5.5 0.1 C+2023 TYC 4959-178-1 Ross 486A 0.076 0.027 −4.9 0.2 eRASS1 * rho01 Cnc B GJ 324B 0.054 0.029 −4.5 0.2 eRASS1 2MASS J18244689-0620311 BD-06 4756B 0.083 0.018 −2.9 0.1 2RXS 2MASS J20032651 +2952000 G 125-55 0.0614 0.0067 −3.87 0.05 4XMM HD 233153 GJ 212 . . . . . . −3.79 0.5 R+2022 HD 61606B BD-03 2002 0.395 0.074 −4.68 0.08 eRASS1 TYC 4682-2798-1 G 70-50 0.0413 0.0035 −4.79 0.06 4XMM HD 154363B PM J17052-0505 . . . . . . −4.82 0.5 R+2022 HD 50281B GJ 250B . . . . . . −5.25 0.02 ZP2025 HD 24916B GJ 157B 0.4647 0.039 −2.29 0.05 2RXS                

> Notes. CXand σ(CX) are X-ray count rates and their uncertainties in counts s −1and fX/fbol is the X-ray to bolometric flux ratio. Values without uncertainties are upper limits. See text for details (Sect. 4.9).
> References. ZP2025: Zhu & Preibisch (2025), R +2022: Reiners et al. (2022), C +2023: Caramazza et al. (2023), 4XMM /2RXP /eRASS1 /
> 2RXS: this work, using data from XMM-Newton, ROSAT, or eROSITA. Article number, page 22

Merle et al.: P lato Benchmark Stars 

Table E.1. Detailed physical parameters for the 15 stars in the gold sample (having B1 levels of mass, radius, and luminosity). Star M [M⊙] R [R⊙] L [L⊙] τ [Gyr] 

Teff [K] log g [dex] log( ρ/ρ ⊙) [dex] LD coe ffi cients [Fe /H] [dex] Prot [d] fbol [10 −11 W m −2] ϖ [mas] 

α Cen A 1.0788 ± 0.0029 [1] 1.2175 ± 0.0055 (A.1) 1.514 ± 0.015 (A.13) 7.1 ± 1.1 [2] 5803 ± 19 (A.19) 4.3001 ± 0.0041 (A.7) −0.2235 ± 0.006 (A.11) –0.237 ± 0.007 [3] 28 .8 ± 2.5 [4] 2730 .9 ± 5.4 [5] 750 .81 ± 0.38 [1] 

α Cen B 0.9092 ± 0.0025 [1] 0.8591 ± 0.0036 (A.1) 0.4882 ± 0.0049 (A.13) 7.1 ± 1.1 [2] 5206 ± 17 (A.19) 4.5287 ± 0.0038 (A.7) 0.1566 ± 0.0056 (A.11) –0.221 ± 0.016 [3] 43 .3 ± 1.5 [6] 880 .5 ± 3.5 [5] 750 .81 ± 0.38 [1] EBLM J0113 +31 A †

1.029 ± 0.025 [7] 1.417 ± 0.014 [7] 2.55 ± 0.08 [7] 6.7 ± 0.5 [7] 6124 ± 50 [7] 4.148 ± 0.006 [7] −0.4413 ± 0.0072 [7] –

−0.33 ± 0.15 [7] 10 .87 ± 0.6 [7] 0.262 ± 0.005 [7] 5.665 ± 0.031 [8] EBLM J0608-59 A †

1.098 ± 0.018 [9] 1.321 ± 0.017 [9] 2.09 ± 0.09 [9] 6 ± 0.3 [9] 6031 ± 56 [9] 4.24 ± 0.01 [9] −0.322 ± 0.016 [9] h′ 

> 1

= 0.88 ± 0.002 , h′ 

> 2

= 0.16 ± 0.02 [10] 0.01 ± 0.05 [9] 18 .6 ± 3.1 [11] 0.0417 ± 0.0005 [9] 2.502 ± 0.01 [8] HD 22064 A †

1.345 ± 0.031 [12] 1.554 ± 0.014 [12] 4.55 ± 0.06 [12] 1.8 ± 0.3 [12] 6763 ± 49 [12] 4.184 ± 0.006 [12] −0.4449 ± 0.0073 [12] –

−0.03 ± 0.15 [12] 3.09 ± 0.03 [12] 0.751 ± 0.009 [12] 7.178 ± 0.021 [8] 

ι Peg A 1.326 ± 0.016 [13] 1.543 ± 0.068 (A.1) 3.638 ± 0.085 (A.13) –6418 ± 142 (A.19) 4.15 ± 0.06 [5] −0.471 ± 0.058 (A.11) –

−0.11 ± 0.02 [14] – 82 .21 ± 0.33 [5] 86 .9 ± 1 [13] 

μ Cas A 0.744 ± 0.012 [15] 0.8027 ± 0.0079 (A.1) 0.478 ± 0.0076 (A.13) 12 .7 ± 2.7 [15] 5357 ± 31 (A.19) 4.515 ± 0.011 [15] 0.14 ± 0.013 (A.11) –

−0.83 ± 0.02 [14] – 25 .98 ± 0.38 [5] 132 .66 ± 0.69 [15] TYC 8511-888-1 A †

1.3083 ± 0.0051 [16] 1.9289 ± 0.0031 [16] 5.83 ± 0.15 [16] –6457 ± 45 [16] 3.9836 ± 0.0012 [16] −0.7392 ± 0.0027 (A.11) –0 ± 0.2 [16] 27 .13 ± 22 .65 [17] 0.1294 ± 0.0036 (A.17) 2.633 ± 0.014 [8] TYC 8511-888-1 B †

1.0897 ± 0.0035 [16] 1.1814 ± 0.0038 [16] 2.018 ± 0.056 [16] –6324 ± 44 [16] 4.3297 ± 0.0026 [16] −0.1799 ± 0.0044 (A.11) –0 ± 0.2 [16] 28 .49 ± 13 .66 [17] 0.0448 ± 0.0013 (A.17) 2.633 ± 0.014 [8] AI Phe A 1.1938 ± 0.0008 [18] 1.8036 ± 0.0022 [18] 4.329 ± 0.063 [19] 4.39 ± 0.32 [20] 6199 ± 22 [19] 4.002 ± 0.0011 [18] −0.6925 ± 0.0016 [18] –

−0.14 ± 0.1 [19] – 0.4797 ± 0.0076 (A.17) 5.885 ± 0.019 [19] AI Phe B 1.2438 ± 0.0008 [18] 2.9303 ± 0.0023 [18] 5.207 ± 0.065 [19] 4.39 ± 0.32 [20] 5094 ± 16 [19] 3.5981 ± 0.0009 [18] −1.3073 ± 0.0012 [18] –

−0.14 ± 0.1 [19] – 0.577 ± 0.0081 (A.17) 5.885 ± 0.019 [19] LL Aqr A 1.1947 ± 0.0009 [21] 1.318 ± 0.0013 [21] 2.377 ± 0.077 [21] 4.7 ± 0.14 [22] 6242 ± 50 [21] 4.2755 ± 0.0009 [21] −0.2825 ± 0.0013 (A.11) –0.02 ± 0.04 [23] 19 .1 ± 2.7 [23] 0.409 ± 0.013 (A.17) 7.358 ± 0.02 [24] LL Aqr B 1.0334 ± 0.0006 [21] 0.9927 ± 0.0008 [21] 1.03 ± 0.031 [21] 4.7 ± 0.14 [22] 5839 ± 44 [21] 4.4587 ± 0.0008 [21] 0.0238 ± 0.0011 (A.11) –0.03 ± 0.06 [23] 14 .1 ± 1.6 [23] 0.1771 ± 0.0054 (A.17) 7.358 ± 0.02 [24] WW Aur A †

1.964 ± 0.007 [25] 1.927 ± 0.011 [25] 13 .4 ± 3.1 (A.15) –7962 ± 452 [25] 4.1614 ± 0.0052 (A.7) −0.5615 ± 0.0076 (A.11) –0.5 ± 0.25 [25] 2.79 ± 0.26 [25] 5.4 ± 1.2 (A.17) 11 .186 ± 0.069 [8] WW Aur B †

1.814 ± 0.007 [25] 1.841 ± 0.011 [25] 10 .6 ± 2.4 (A.15) –7674 ± 436 [25] 4.1666 ± 0.0055 (A.7) −0.5365 ± 0.008 (A.11) –0.5 ± 0.25 [25] 2.52 ± 0.22 [25] 4.24 ± 0.97 (A.17) 11 .186 ± 0.069 [8] 

Note: For each star, the first two rows list the eight assessed stellar properties, while the third row lists selected ancillary parameters. Other ancillary parameteters are available online.  

> †

Component not resolved by Gaia DR3 (the reported parallax corresponds to the unresolved system). 

References: 

[1] Akeson et al. (2021); [2] Salmon et al. (2021); [3] Morel (2018); [4] Hallam et al. (1991); [5] Soubiran et al. (2024) [6] Char et al. (1993); [7] Maxted et al. (2022); [8] Gaia Collaboration (2022); [9] Maxted et al. (2024); [10] Fitzpatrick et al. (2025) [11] Kostov et al. (2020); [12] Maxted (2023a); [13] Boden et al. (1999); [14] Soubiran et al. (2022); [15] Bond et al. (2020) [16] Miller et al. (2022); [17] Ratajczak et al. (2021); [18] Maxted et al. (2020); [19] Miller et al. (2020); [20] Kirkby-Kent et al. (2016) [21] Miller et al. (2026); [22] Valle et al. (2023); [23] Graczyk et al. (2016); [24] Gallenne et al. (2023); [25] Southworth et al. (2005) Article number, page 23 A&A proofs: manuscript no. plato_bms 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 Mass [M ⊙ ]050 100 150 200 250 300 total (859) B1 (249) B2 (500) B3 (91) 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 Radius [R ⊙ ]050 100 150 200 250 300 total (852) B1 (332) B2 (464) B3 (0) 0 2 4 6 8 10 Luminosity [L ⊙ ]050 100 150 200 250 300 total (1013) B1 (168) B2 (575) B3 (0) 0.0 2.5 5.0 7.5 10.0 12.5 15.0 17.5 20.0 Age [Ga] 050 100 150 200 250 300 total (479) B1 (0) B2 (452) B3 (27) 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 

Teff [K] 050 100 150 200 250 300 total (1069) B1 (150) B2 (681) B3 (0) 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 5.0 5.5 log g

050 100 150 200 250 300 total (1059) B1 (195) B2 (740) B3 (47) 

Fig. F.1. Histograms of stellar properties ( M, R, L, τ, Teff , log g) color-coded by benchmark level (B1: red, B2: green, B3: gray). The overall black histogram displays the total distribution of compiled values, including stars without an assigned benchmark tier. Article number, page 24