Title: Irradiated Atmospheres VII. Effect of Mixing Energy Flux on Atmosphere-Interior Coupling

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.05287v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 02:05:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Draft version October 6, 2026 

Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1 

Irradiated Atmospheres VII. Effect of Mixing Energy Flux on Atmosphere-Interior Coupling 

Wei Zhong ,1 Zhen-Tai Zhang ,2, 3, 4 Mei Ting Mak ,5, 6, ∗ Xiang-Xing Chen ,1 Bo Ma ,2, 3 Xian-Yu Tan ,7

Cong Yu ,2, 3, 4, 8 and Dong-dong Ni 1, 4, 9, 10 

> 1

Institute of Science and Technology for Deep Space Exploration, Nanjing University, Suzhou, 215163, PR China 

> 2

School of Physics and Astronomy, Sun Yat-Sen University, Zhuhai, 519082, PR China 

> 3

CSST Science Center for the Guangdong-Hong Kong-Macau Greater Bay Area, Zhuhai, 519082, PR China 

> 4

State Key Laboratory of Lunar and Planetary Sciences, Macau University of Science and Technology, Macau, PR China 

> 5

Atmospheric, Oceanic, and Planetary Physics Department, University of Oxford, OX1 3PU, UK 

> 6

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter EX4 4QL, UK 

> 7

Tsung-Dao Lee Institute & School of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 201210, PR China 

> 8

International Centre of Supernovae, Yunnan Key Laboratory, Kunming 650216, PR China 

> 9

Shishan Laboratory, Nanjing University, Suzhou 215000, PR China 

> 10

Jiangsu Key Laboratory of Quantum Information Science and Technology, Nanjing University, Suzhou, 215163, PR China 

ABSTRACT Highly irradiated, underdense rocky planets such as puffy Venuses may host strong coupling between their atmospheres and magma-ocean interiors. Previous studies have mainly treated this coupling through radiative transfer and chemical equilibrium, leaving the role of vertical mixing unclear. Here we quantify how energy transport associated with vertical mixing modifies the thermal structure, volatile chemistry, and emission spectra of puffy Venuses. Atmospheric circulation and gravity-wave breaking are possible dynamical sources of such transport. We show that this energy transport provides an additional greenhouse-like heating pathway by warming the deep atmosphere, thereby increasing the pressure and temperature at the magma-ocean surface. The resulting thermal changes also reshape the atmospheric composition, especially the abundances of CO and H 2O, and change the partitioning of C-, H-, and O-bearing volatiles between the atmosphere and the magma ocean. Moreover, these changes reshape the mid-infrared planet–star flux ratio, especially at low equilibrium temperatures and in higher-mass planets. Under high C/O, it slightly increases the flux near 3 .5–4 .0 μm, but more broadly reduces atmospheric transparency and suppresses the flux. This may affect radius estimates for puffy Venuses over a limited temperature range. 

Keywords: Exoplanet Atmospheres (487) — Atmospheric structure (2309) — Radiative transfer sim-ulations (1967)—Vertical mixing (739) 

1. INTRODUCTION Recent JWST observations have renewed interest in highly irradiated rocky exoplanets with molten or par-tially molten surfaces and possible volatile atmospheres. Depending on atmospheric heat redistribution and inter-nal heat sources, these planets may sustain either global 

Corresponding author: Cong Yu yucong@mail.sysu.edu.cn Corresponding author: Dong-dong Ni ddni@nju.edu.cn  

> ∗

Croucher Postdoctoral Fellow 

magma oceans or dayside magma oceans, and are com-monly referred to as lava worlds (B. P. Coy et al. 2025; M. Farhat & E. Chiang 2026). A subset of such plan-ets with sufficiently extended, carbon-rich atmospheres may also experience substantial radius inflation (B. P. Coy et al. 2025; M. Farhat & E. Chiang 2026) and have been described as puffy Venuses (B. Peng & D. Valencia 2024). Although the atmosphere is the primary observ-able component, the evolution of these planets is funda-mentally governed by atmosphere–interior coupling. This coupling is established at the atmosphere– magma ocean interface. The magma ocean outgasses volatile species such as H 2O, CO, and CO 2, while melt– gas reactions and dissolution back into the melt regulate arXiv:2610.05287v1 [astro-ph.EP] 4 Oct 2026 2atmospheric abundances and elemental ratios, including C/O. In turn, the atmosphere controls volatile escape, radiative cooling, and the surface energy budget of the magma ocean. The resulting two-way feedback shapes both atmospheric chemistry and interior evolution (Y. Abe & T. Matsui 1986; L. T. Elkins-Tanton 2008; L. Schaefer et al. 2016; H. Nicholls et al. 2026a,b). The broader role of C/O in determining terrestrial-planet composition was discussed by J. C. Bond et al. (2010), while N. Madhusudhan (2012) showed that atmospheric C/O is an important diagnostic of atmospheric chem-istry and can constrain planetary interiors and forma-tion conditions. For atmosphere–magma ocean systems specifically, studies have examined how volatile parti-tioning and redox evolution regulate atmospheric com-position and elemental ratios (E. D. Young et al. 2023; C. Seo et al. 2024; A. Werlen et al. 2025, 2026). Al-though non-ideal thermodynamic effects can become im-portant under the extreme pressures relevant to deep sub-Neptune interiors (A. Werlen et al. 2026), such ef-fects are expected to be secondary for super-Earths and smaller rocky planets, including those considered here (D. J. Bower et al. 2025). 55 Cnc e provides an important observational motiva-tion for treating lava worlds as coupled interior–surface– atmosphere systems. JWST NIRCam and MIRI obser-vations of its 4–12 μm thermal emission spectrum disfa-vor a tenuous atmosphere made only of vaporized rock. Instead, they support a secondary volatile atmosphere, possibly rich in CO or CO 2, that may be supplied by magma-ocean outgassing (R. Hu et al. 2024). This inter-pretation shows that the atmosphere is not an isolated layer. Its composition can be controlled by volatile ex-change with the magma ocean and the underlying inte-rior. At the same time, atmospheric cooling, circulation, and escape can reshape the surface volatile budget. Re-cent models therefore emphasize the coupled evolution of dayside magma oceans, mantle convection, volatile transport, and atmospheric outgassing (e.g., T. G. Meier et al. 2026). Atmospheric spectra may thus provide a direct probe of interior–surface–atmosphere coupling and help constrain volatile inventories, C/O ratio, H 2Oabundance, and molecular diagnostics such as SiH 4/CH 4

(C. Seo et al. 2024; K. Hakim et al. 2026; A. Werlen et al. 2025). To explore this coupled picture across different plan-etary regimes, we consider 55 Cnc e and TOI-561 b as two test cases. The former serves as an observa-tional benchmark for a relatively massive lava world with a possible secondary volatile atmosphere. The lat-ter provides a complementary lower-mass example of a highly irradiated, low-density super-Earth. Recent JWST/NIRSpec dayside emission observations of TOI-561 b disfavor a bare-rock interpretation and support the presence of a thick volatile atmosphere, highlighting TOI-561 b as an important example of a highly irradi-ated low-mass planet with a possible volatile reservoir (J. K. Teske et al. 2025). Together, these two planets allow us to examine how interior–surface–atmosphere coupling may shape observable spectra under different planetary masses and volatile conditions. Existing models of atmosphere–interior coupling on lava worlds have primarily emphasized volatile parti-tioning, equilibrium chemistry, radiative transfer, and radiative–convective structure (M. Maurice et al. 2024; H. Nicholls et al. 2025b; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2025). More recent studies have also begun to explore the roles of tidal heating, magma-ocean tides, and magma-ocean circulation in setting the thermal and dynamical states of these planets (M. Farhat et al. 2025; M. Farhat & E. Chiang 2026; H. Nicholls et al. 2025a; Y. Lai et al. 2026). However, the consequences of mechanically driven en-ergy deposition within the atmosphere for atmosphere– interior coupling remain poorly understood. One process that may be particularly important, but has not yet been explored in this context, is the deposi-tion of mechanical energy associated with vertical mix-ing in stably stratified atmospheric layers. Such vertical mixing may arise from large-scale atmospheric circula-tion (X. Zhang 2020) or from gravity-wave saturation and breaking (D. F. Strobel et al. 1987; X. Zhang 2020). In exoplanet atmospheres, circulation driven by uneven stellar heating can excite gravity waves through flow ad-justment and dynamical instabilities. These waves can propagate into stably stratified layers and may eventu-ally saturate or break as their amplitudes increase. In Earth’s middle atmosphere, A. S. Medvedev & G. P. Klaassen (2003) showed that gravity-wave saturation and breaking produce a downward sensible-heat flux whose divergence typically heats the layers below and cools those above, while the dissipated wave kinetic en-ergy is irreversibly converted into heat. Previous studies have mainly emphasized material transport and mixing associated with convection and turbulence in convective regions (X. Zhang 2020). Here, in contrast, we focus on the thermal effect of vertical energy transport in the stably stratified radiative zone and its possible role in atmosphere–interior coupling. The adopted Kheat zz 

is used to describe this thermal energy transport and is not intended to specify a unique dynamical driver. This energy transport may alter the thermal structure of the deep atmosphere and, in turn, modify the surface boundary condition of the magma ocean. By warm-ing the deep atmosphere and the magma-ocean surface, 3

Figure 1. Schematic of the coupled atmosphere–mantle model. The light-blue region represents the atmosphere, where C–H–O chemical equilibrium and radiative–convective-mixing transport determine the composition and thermal structure. The yellow region represents the mantle, described by the VintEoS using the lower-mantle mineralogical prescription of B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024), which is used to calculate the thermal structure and depth of the magma ocean. We adopt a spherically symmetric atmosphere, illustrated by the sector geometry, so that gravity is allowed to vary inward with the planetary structure rather than being held constant. The gray band marks the atmosphere–MO interface, where the atmosphere and MO share the same surface pressure Ps, temperature Ts, radius Rs, and enclosed mass Ms, and where atmospheric volatiles equilibrate with dissolved volatiles in the melt. The red dashed curve denotes the ϕmelt = 0 .4 contour, following B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024). This contour defines the base of the magma ocean. The region above it, where ϕmelt ≥ 0.4, extends to the atmosphere–MO interface and has a total mass MMO . The schematic does not imply that the entire mantle is molten. The combined atmosphere–magma-ocean reservoir is used to compute the total carbon and hydrogen mass fractions, XC,tot and 

XH,tot . The orange region is the rocky core, and the black curve indicates the assumed temperature profile. 

this process may reduce the stellar irradiation required to sustain a given melt state or atmospheric thickness. In this study, we investigate how gravity-wave break-ing and the associated vertical mixing influence atmo-sphere–interior coupling on lava worlds. We quantify the resulting modifications to magma-ocean surface tem-perature, atmospheric thermal structure, and observable planetary properties, and we discuss the implications for interpreting JWST observations of hot rocky exoplanets. The structure of this work is as follows. In § 2, we describe the methodology used to simulate the coupled magma ocean–atmosphere system, including the treat-ment of vertical mixing. § 3 presents the thermal impact of vertical mixing on the atmospheric structure, the as-sociated changes in volatile speciation under different mantle redox conditions, and the resulting changes in the planetary emission spectrum. Finally, § 4 provides a summary of our main findings and a discussion of their broader implications. 

2. MAGMA OCEAN-ATMOSPHERE MODEL WITH VERTICAL MIXING We develop a coupled planetary model consisting of a carbon-bearing C–H–O atmosphere and an underlying magma ocean (MO), which are assumed to be in thermo-chemical equilibrium at their interface. We focus on how energy transport associated with vertical mixing affects atmosphere–interior coupling. The coupling framework is shown in Fig. 1. The model comprises three regions, of which the atmosphere and the magma ocean are mod-eled explicitly. From outside to inside, these are: (1) a radiative–convective atmosphere that includes verti-cal mixing and carbon-hydrogen-oxygen (C-H-O) chem-ical equilibrium; (2) a magma ocean, whose adiabatic thermal structure is calculated following B. Peng & D. 4Valencia (2024) using the Vinet equation of state for a lower-mantle mixture of bridgmanite (bm) and magne-siow¨ ustite (mw). This mixture specifies the equation of state rather than the spatial extent of the MO, whose base is defined by the ϕmelt = 0 .4 rheological boundary; and (3) an underlying rock-like interior, which is not modeled explicitly. This manuscript is organized as follows. § 2.1 presents the key atmospheric reactions and equilibrium relations. 

§ 2.2 describes the radiative transfer equations. § 2.3 outlines the magma-ocean (lower-mantle) calculations. 

§ 2.4 explains how we couple the atmosphere to the magma ocean. 2.1. Atmospheric chemical equilibrium 

Our atmospheric model links six volatile species—H 2,O2, H 2O, CO 2, CO, and CH 4—through three gas-phase reactions (D. J. Bower et al. 2022; B. Peng & D. Valencia 2024): CO + 0 .5 O 2 ⇔ CO 2 , (1) H2 + 0 .5 O 2 ⇔ H2O , (2) CO 2 + 2 H 2 ⇔ CH 4 + O 2 . (3) For each prescribed C/O ratio, the corresponding C/H ratio is determined self-consistently from the coupled atmosphere–magma ocean equations. Both elemental ratios are uniform with altitude, whereas the local equi-librium molar fractions vary with pressure and tempera-ture as yi = yi(P, T ; C /O, C/H). We assume local ther-mochemical equilibrium throughout the atmosphere and equilibrium with the magma ocean at the atmosphere– MO interface. This approximation is most appropri-ate in the hot, high-pressure deep atmosphere, where chemical equilibration is expected to be faster than ver-tical transport. It may break down where chemical timescales exceed transport timescales, most plausibly in the cooler, lower-pressure upper atmosphere. The resulting composition affects the thermodynamic prop-erties of the atmosphere, including its density and mean heat capacity. For an ideal, single-species gas, the specific Gibbs free energy may be written as (K. G. Denbigh 1981; K. Heng et al. 2016; M. Tian & K. Heng 2024) 

G = G0 + RT ln Ψ , (4) where G0 ≡ G(P0), P0 is a reference pressure (typically 1 bar), and R is the universal gas constant. In this ex-pression, R = 8 .314462618 J mol −1 K−1. For an ideal gas, Ψ = P/P 0; the goal is to generalize Ψ to gas mix-tures and to non-ideal behavior. In analogy with the formalism of M. Tian & K. Heng (2024), we write for species i in a mixture Ψi = aiff0

= fi

P0

, (5) where f is the fugacity of the corresponding pure gas, 

ai is the activity (generalizing the mixing ratio), and 

fi ≡ aif is the fugacity of species i in the mixture. We take f0 = P0 (appropriate when P0 = 1 bar and the gas is close to ideal at the reference state). Note that Ψi is not the activity; the two are sometimes conflated only because different factors can be grouped inside the logarithm (K. G. Denbigh 1981; K. Heng et al. 2016; M. Tian & K. Heng 2024). As an example, consider reaction (1). The Gibbs free energies of the relevant species may be written as 

GCO 2 = GCO 2,0 + RT ln Ψ CO 2 ,GO2 = GO2,0 + RT ln Ψ O2 ,GCO = GCO ,0 + RT ln Ψ CO .

(6) The Gibbs free energy change for the reaction is ∆G = GCO 2 − GCO − 0.5 GO2 ,

∆G0 = GCO 2,0 − GCO ,0 − 0.5 GO2,0 . (7) Combining the expressions yields ∆G − ∆G0 = RT ln ΨCO 2

ΨCO Ψ1/2O2

!

. (8) At chemical equilibrium, ∆ G = 0, and ∆ G0 is the stan-dard Gibbs free energy change at P0 (i.e., the Gibbs free energy of reaction evaluated at the reference pressure). The equilibrium constant is then 

Keq (T ) = exp 



− ∆G0

RT



= ΨCO 2

ΨCO Ψ1/2O2

. (9) Using Ψ i = fi/P 0 (with P0 = 1 bar), we obtain 

Keq ,1(T ) = fCO 2

fCO f 1/2O2

. (10) By the same procedure, the equilibrium constants for the other two reactions are 

Keq ,2(T ) = fH2O

fH2 f 1/2O2

, (11) and 

Keq ,3(T ) = fCH 4 fO2

fCO 2 f 2H2

. (12) To compute Keq (T ), we use thermochemical data from the NIST Chemistry WebBook (N. B. L. Thermodynam-ics Research Center 2021). For the six species consid-ered here, the NIST Shomate-polynomial fits provide a 5common temperature range of 500–6000 K. All atmo-spheric layers in our models have T ≥ 500 K, so no low-temperature extrapolation is required. For T > 6000 K, we linearly extrapolate the NIST-based thermochemical data following B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024) and use the extrapolated values to calculate Keq (T ). The resulting 

Keq (T ) functions for the three gas-phase reactions are shown in Fig. 13 in the Appendix. With Keq (T ) specified, chemical equilibrium at each atmospheric layer can be enforced through the fugacity form of the mass-action relations. This requires express-ing the fugacity of each species in terms of the local ther-modynamic state ( P, T ) and the layer composition. For a non-ideal gas, the fugacity is written as f = ϕP , where 

ϕ is the fugacity coefficient obtained from an equation of state (EoS). Under our assumptions, we approximate the fugacity of species i in the mixture as 

fi = ϕi, pure yi P, (13) where yi is the local molar fraction and P is the total pressure at that radial location in the atmosphere. Here 

ϕi, pure is the fugacity coefficient of the corresponding pure gas evaluated at the local ( P, T ). We compute ϕi, pure using non-ideal EoS fits. Specifi-cally, we adopt the modified Lee–Kesler EoS developed by Z. Duan et al. (1992) for CO 2 and H 2O, and its gener-alized extension for the remaining four species (Z. Duan et al. 1996). The EoS of Z. Duan et al. (1992) is cal-ibrated up to 1273 K and 8000 bar, whereas that of Z. Duan et al. (1996) is calibrated up to 2000 K and 25 ,000 bar. For conditions outside these ranges, includ-ing the T > 6000 K conditions reached in the deepest atmospheric layers, we follow B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024) and continue to evaluate the same EoS fits with-out modification. Their quantitative accuracy outside the calibrated ranges is less well constrained. The prescribed C/O ratio and the self-consistently de-termined C/H ratio are both assumed to be vertically uniform throughout the atmosphere. In terms of the lo-cal equilibrium molar fractions, these constraints imply C/O = yCO 2 + yCO + yCH 4

2yCO 2 + yCO + 2 yO2 + yH2O

, (14) and C/H = yCO 2 + yCO + yCH 4

4yCH 4 + 2 yH2O + 2 yH2

. (15) We close the system using the mole-fraction normaliza-tion condition, P 

> i

yi = 1. The mass-action relations and elemental-ratio constraints in Eqs. (10)–(15), to-gether with this normalization condition, define a non-linear system that we solve numerically in each atmo-spheric layer to obtain the local chemical-equilibrium composition, yi(P, T ; C /O, C/H). Vertical mixing there-fore affects the equilibrium abundances only indirectly through changes in the atmospheric temperature struc-ture. In our model, C/O is prescribed, whereas C/H is de-termined self-consistently from the coupled atmosphere– MO equilibrium and elemental mass balance. In par-ticular, C/O serves as a convenient proxy for the redox state of the outgassed mixture. Because the mantle con-tains vastly more redox capacity than the atmosphere, it is expected to buffer and control the atmospheric re-dox state. In the literature, mantle redox conditions are commonly parameterized using mineral redox buffers, most often the iron–w¨ ustite (IW) buffer (e.g., F. Gail-lard et al. 2022a; D. J. Bower et al. 2022; M. Tian & K. Heng 2024). However, these buffers are experimentally calibrated for terrestrial mantle conditions and temper-atures below ∼ 3000 K (e.g., C. Ballhaus et al. 1991; M. M. Hirschmann 2021). Our deep atmospheres can exceed this range and may reach > 6000 K for the most strongly irradiated planets. We therefore treat C/O as an input parameter in our atmospheric calculations, rather than extrapolating mineral-buffer calibrations far beyond their validated regime. 2.2. Vertical Mixing in Radiatively Heated Atmospheres 

In this work, we consider vertical mixing in the up-per radiative zone that may be associated with atmo-spheric circulation or gravity-wave breaking. We pa-rameterize the associated turbulent heat transport using the mixing-length prescription for forced turbulence in a stably stratified atmosphere developed by A. N. Youdin & J. L. Mitchell (2010). We take downward energy flux to be negative, i.e., 

Fmix = −Kheat zz ρ g 



1 − ∇∇ad 



, (16) where Kheat zz is the effective eddy diffusivity associated with energy transport by vertical mixing. In our model, 

Kheat zz is used only for energy transport and is not ap-plied to the vertical diffusion of chemical species. The quantities ρ and g are the gas density and gravitational acceleration, respectively. The local logarithmic tem-perature gradient is defined as 

∇ ≡ d ln Td ln P . (17) The quantity ∇ad is the adiabatic logarithmic tempera-ture gradient. The radiative gradient used to assess con-vective stability is evaluated locally from the radiative 

P –T profile as ∇rad ≡ (d ln T /d ln P )rad . The gradient 6

∇ in Equation (16) is evaluated from the current atmo-spheric structure. In radiatively stable layers, ∇ < ∇ad ,so Fmix < 0 and the heat flux is directed downward. Its magnitude increases with Kzz and with 1 − ∇ /∇ad , and it vanishes as ∇ → ∇ ad .We compute the non-ideal adiabatic gradient consis-tently with the real-gas EoS as 

∇ad = d ln Td ln P ad 

= PCp

dV dT P

, (18) where Cp is the mean molar heat capacity at constant pressure, and V is the mixture molar volume . We eval-uate 

Cp(T ) = X

> i

yi Cp,i (T ). (19) For each species, we compute Cp,i (T ) using a Shomate fit to tabulated NIST data (N. B. L. Thermodynamics Research Center 2021), 

Cp,i (T ) = A + Bt + Ct 2 + Dt 3 + Et −2, (20) where t = T / 1000 and A–E are species-dependent coef-ficients. We linearly extrapolate Cp,i (T ) above 6000 K. For each species, the temperature derivative of the molar volume at fixed pressure is 

dV i

dT P

= R

P



Zi + T dZ i

dT P



, (21) where Zi(P, T ) is the compressibility factor of species i

defined by 

Zi ≡ P V i

RT . (22) We precomputed tables of Zi(P, T ) and (dZ i/dT )|P

from the EoS and interpolate them during the atmo-spheric integration. The mixture-averaged derivative is 

dV dT P

= X

> i

yi

dV i

dT P

+ X

> i

Vi

dy i

dT P

. (23) The second term accounts for changes in the equilibrium composition with temperature. We compute the non-ideal density using a real-gas equation of state (EoS), 

ρ = P μ Zmix R T , (24) where P is pressure, T is temperature, and μ = P 

> i

yiμi

is the mean molecular mass of the mixture (with mo-lar fraction yi and molecular mass μi for species i). The mixture compressibility factor is denoted Zmix (P, T ). In practice, we obtain Zmix from the EoS tables; when us-ing species-based tables, we evaluate it with the same mixing rule adopted for the EoS (e.g., Zmix = P 

> i

yiZi

if that approximation is used consistently). We take the compressibility factors from Z. Duan et al. (1992); Z. Duan et al. (1996). In this section, we incorporate energy transport by vertical mixing into the atmospheric energy equilibrium. This extends the conventional radiative–convective equi-librium (RCE) framework (I. Hubeny & D. Mihalas 2014; I. Hubeny 2017; S. Gandhi & N. Madhusud-han 2017a) to radiative–convective–mixing equilibrium (RCME) (W. Zhong et al. 2025b; Z.-T. Zhang et al. 2025a). The steady-state energy balance is 

Z ∞

> 0

κν (Jν − Bν ) dν + g

4πdF mix 

dP + g

4πdF conv 

dP = 0 , (25) where κν is the opacity, Jν is the mean intensity, and Bν

is the Planck function. The quantities Fmix and Fconv 

denote the vertical-mixing and convective energy fluxes, respectively. In our model, Fmix is included in radia-tively stable layers, whereas Fconv is included in convec-tively unstable layers. Equation (25) therefore applies throughout both regions of the atmosphere. In convectively unstable layers, we calculate Fconv us-ing the standard mixing-length theory (MLT) formula-tion of R. Kippenhahn & A. Weigert (1990), following its implementation in atmospheric models by I. Hubeny & D. Mihalas (2014), I. Hubeny (2017), and S. Gandhi & N. Madhusudhan (2017a). 

Fconv =

 gQH P

32 

1/2

ρc PT (∇ − ∇ el )3/2

 ℓHP

2

.

(26) Here, HP = P/ (ρg ) is the pressure scale height, Q =

−(∂ ln ρ/∂ ln T )P, cP is the mass-specific heat capacity at constant pressure, ℓ is the mixing length, and ∇el is the logarithmic temperature gradient within a convec-tive element. We adopt ℓ = HP following S. Gandhi & N. Madhusudhan (2017a). The convective-element gra-dient and transport efficiency are determined using the corresponding standard MLT closure relations. The mean intensity Jν is the angle average of the spe-cific intensity Iν (S. Gandhi & N. Madhusudhan 2017a), 

Jν = 12

Z 1

> −1

Iν (μ) dμ . (27) Here μ ≡ cos θ, where θ is the angle from the vertical. In a 1D, plane-parallel, steady atmosphere, Iν satisfies the radiative transfer equation, 

μ ∂I ν

∂τ ν

= Iν − Sν , (28) where τν is the optical depth and Sν is the source func-tion, defined as the ratio of total emissivity to total opac-ity. 7We solve Equation (25) together with the radiative-transfer equation (28) as a coupled steady-state prob-lem. No time evolution or time-stepping of the radiative fluxes is involved. A converged radiative-equilibrium at-mosphere obtained with Fmix = Fconv = 0 is used as the initial model. Each iteration consists of a formal solution followed by a complete linearization step. Dur-ing the formal solution, the radiative-transfer equation is solved for the current temperature profile to obtain the corresponding radiation field. The local temper-ature gradient is then recalculated from the resulting 

P –T profile and compared with ∇ad according to the Schwarzschild criterion. Fmix is evaluated in radiatively stable layers, while Fconv is calculated using MLT in convectively unstable layers. Equations (25) and (28) are then jointly linearized, and the Rybicki reorganiza-tion scheme is used to update the radiation field and temperature structure (I. Hubeny & D. Mihalas 2014; I. Hubeny 2017; S. Gandhi & N. Madhusudhan 2017a; W. Zhong et al. 2025b; Z.-T. Zhang et al. 2025a). The updated structure is used in the next iteration, and the calculation continues until max |δT /T | < 10 −6.Our radiative-transfer calculation adopts the plane-parallel approximation, while the hydrostatic structure is treated in spherical geometry following B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024). This allows the radial coordinate, en-closed mass, and local gravitational acceleration to vary with depth and consistently connects the atmosphere to the underlying magma-ocean mantle. Under spherical symmetry, hydrostatic equilibrium and mass conservation give 

dP = −ρ(r) g(r) dr, (29) and we relate pressure to the column-mass coordinate 

m through 

dP = g(r) dm, (30) which yields 

dr = − 1

ρ(r) dm. (31) The enclosed mass profile follows from mass conserva-tion, 

dM = 4 πr 2ρ(r) dr. (32) Here the local gravitational acceleration is 

g(r) = G M (r)

r2 , (33) where G is the gravitational constant and M (r) is the mass enclosed within radius r. By integrating these equations with ρ(r) from the equation of state, we ob-tain r(m) and M (r). By integrating these equations together with ρ(r) from the EoS, we obtain the radial profiles r(m), M (r), and 

g(r) and thereby construct the spherically symmetric atmospheric structure used to couple the atmosphere consistently to the magma-ocean mantle. 2.3. Magma-ocean Mantle 

As illustrated in Fig. 1, we model the planet’s man-tle as a two-phase assemblage of bridgmanite (bm) and magnesiow¨ ustite (mw) (M. Plotnykov & D. Valencia 2020). We compute its radial structure by integrating a set of coupled ordinary differential equations in the enclosed mass coordinate m, solving simultaneously for the radius r, density ρ, pressure P , temperature T , and gravity g:

dr dm = 14πr 2ρ , (34) 

dρ dm = − g

4πr 2ϕ , (35) 

dg dm = Gr2 − Gm 

2πr 5ρ , (36) 

dP dm = − g

4πr 2 , (37) 

dT dm = − gT γ 

4πr 2Ks

. (38) Here ϕ ≡ Ks/ρ is the seismic parameter, where Ks is the adiabatic bulk modulus obtained from an equation of state (EoS). We use the Vinet EoS (VinetEoS) as im-plemented by D. Valencia et al. (2007). We also follow M. Plotnykov & D. Valencia (2020) for the treatment of phase properties and thermodynamic quantities, includ-ing the thermal expansivity and heat capacities. The Gr¨ uneisen parameter γ is computed using the prescrip-tion of D. Valencia et al. (2007). In principle, one may interpolate a mass–radius rela-tion from the super-Earth model grid of M. Plotnykov & D. Valencia (2020) to obtain Rs for a given rocky-planet mass Ms. We neither use the interior grid of M. Plotnykov & D. Valencia (2020) nor adopt the Earth-like core mass fraction (CMF) of 32 .5% assumed in that grid. For simplicity, we instead adopt the empirical mass–radius scaling reported by B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024) and verified there to have only a minor impact on the results: 

Ms

M⊕

=

 Rs

R⊕

1/0.27 

. (39) For a given Ms, Equation (39) provides an estimate of Rs

at the mantle–atmosphere interface. In our calculation, this estimated radius serves only as the outer-boundary 8radius used to initialize the subsequent iterative calcula-tion of the mantle thermodynamic profiles. The choice of CMF does not affect the results of our mantle calcu-lations. The boundary pressure and temperature at this interface are provided by the atmospheric model. The corresponding boundary density is obtained by invert-ing the Vinet EoS at ( P, T ). For the first iteration, we initialize the boundary gravity as gs = GM s/R 2s , and then integrate the structure equations inward. We quantify mantle melting using solidus and liquidus curves, Tsol (P ) and Tliq (P ). We adopt peridotite fits at low pressure (A. Morschhauser et al. 2011) and chon-dritic fits up to 140 GPa (J. Monteux et al. 2016), which we extend linearly to higher pressures. The local melt fraction is 

ϕmelt = T − Tsol 

Tliq − Tsol 

. (40) Here, ϕmelt denotes the local melt fraction and should not be confused with the mantle-averaged melt fraction Φ. Following B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024), we use 

ϕmelt = 0 .4 only to locate the rheological base of the MO. We calculate MMO as the total mantle mass of the overlying region, where ϕmelt ≥ 0.4. Individual layers are not weighted by their local melt fractions. Thus, 

MMO represents an effective, well-mixed, rheologically mobile reservoir rather than the mass of liquid melt alone. We assume that the volatile abundances deter-mined at the atmosphere–MO interface apply through-out this reservoir. This approximation may overestimate the volatile storage assigned to the effective MO relative to a melt-fraction-weighted treatment. The model does not explicitly treat solid–melt volatile partitioning or retention in trapped interstitial melt or melt inclusions. These processes could sequester volatiles in the deeper mantle, reducing the inventory available for atmosphere–MO equilibration and poten-tially decreasing the atmospheric volatile mass and sur-face pressure (H. Nicholls et al. 2026b). The net effect of these omitted processes and the effective-reservoir ap-proximation is not quantified here. 2.4. MO–atmosphere C and H mass balance 

We model chemical exchange between the atmosphere and the magma ocean (MO) by assuming rapid mixing at their interface, so that gas and melt are in equilib-rium at the MO surface, as in previous magma-ocean studies (e.g., D. J. Bower et al. 2022; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2021a; F. Gaillard et al. 2022b). Under this as-sumption, the partitioning of C- and H-bearing volatiles between dissolved and outgassed reservoirs is set by sur-face equilibrium together with solubility in the melt. We parameterize solubility using the Henry-law fits of T. Lichtenberg et al. (2021a). For each species i,

Xi = a (yi,s Ps)b , (41) where Xi is the dissolved mass fraction (by weight) in the MO, a and b are empirical constants, and Ps and 

yi,s are the total pressure and molar fraction at the MO surface. The values of Ps and yi,s are taken from the atmospheric solution. The masses of dissolved elemental carbon and hydro-gen in the MO are 

MC, MO = MMO 

X

> i

ki,C 

μC

μi

Xi , (42) 

MH, MO = MMO 

X

> i

ki,H 

μH

μi

Xi , (43) where ki,C and ki,H are the numbers of C and H atoms in species i, and μC , μH , and μi are molar masses. We then impose conservation of the total C and H inventories of the coupled MO–atmosphere system, 

XC, tot = MC, MO + MC, atm 

Mtot 

, (44) 

XH, tot = MH, MO + MH, atm 

Mtot 

, (45) where MC, atm and MH, atm are the atmospheric masses of elemental carbon and hydrogen obtained from the atmospheric solution, and Mtot is the total mass of the MO plus the atmosphere. 2.5. MO–Atmosphere Coupled Solver 

We construct a self-consistent MO + atmosphere 

model that solves the atmospheric and MO structures and partitions the prescribed bulk carbon and hydrogen inventories between the two reservoirs. The MO pro-vides the lower boundary of the atmosphere and stores dissolved C- and H-bearing volatiles. The atmosphere– MO interface is defined by common values of Ms, Rs, Ps,and Ts. At this interface, the atmospheric composition and dissolved volatile abundances are coupled through chemical and solubility equilibrium. The overall con-figuration of the model is shown in Fig. 1. Of the six atmospheric species, CO, CO 2, CH 4, H 2, and H 2O are allowed to dissolve in the melt. Following B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024), we calculate their dissolved abundances using the Henry’s-law solubility relations compiled by T. Lichtenberg et al. (2021b). O 2 is included in the atmo-spheric chemical-equilibrium calculation but is assumed to be insoluble. We use the total carbon and hydrogen abundances, 

XC,tot and XH,tot , to test whether a model satisfies a 9𝑅ௌ （𝑀௦ ） and C/O Varied C/H and 𝑃ௌ              

> Spherical RCME C-H-O Equilibrium
> 𝑇ௌ and 𝑃ௌ 𝑿𝑪,𝒂𝒕𝒎 and 𝑿𝑯,𝒂𝒕𝒎
> Magma Ocean Modeled with Vint EoS Input Input C and H mass balance:
> 𝑋௖, ௧௢௧(𝐶/𝐻, 𝑃௦) = 𝑿𝑪,𝒂𝒕𝒎 + 𝑿𝑪,𝑴𝑶 𝑋ு, ௧௢௧(𝐶/𝐻, 𝑃௦) = 𝑿𝑯,𝒂𝒕𝒎 + 𝑿𝑯,𝑴𝑶 𝑿𝑪,𝑴𝑶 and 𝑿𝑯,𝑴𝑶 MO mass: 𝑴𝑴𝑶
> 1. 𝒊𝒇 ห𝑿𝒄, 𝒕𝒐𝒕 − 𝑿𝑪,𝒕𝒂𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕ห < tol
> 2. 𝒊𝒇 ห𝑿𝒄, 𝒕𝒐𝒕 − 𝑿𝑯,𝒕𝒂𝒓𝒈𝒆𝒕ห < tol
> 3. 𝑴𝒕𝒐𝒕 = 𝑴𝑴𝑶 + 𝑴𝒂𝒕𝒎
> End !

Not 

> Change : C/H and  𝐏𝐒

Figure 2. Flowchart of the MO–Atmosphere coupled solver showing the various function invocations. The error is defined as the norm of the residual vector between the computed total abundances, ( XC,tot , X H,tot ), and the target abundances, ( XC,target , X H,target ). The optimization stops when the residual norm falls below a tolerance of 10 −6.

prescribed bulk volatile inventory. These abundances include both atmospheric and MO contributions. The atmospheric and dissolved MO masses of carbon and hy-drogen are normalized by the total mass participating in volatile exchange, Mtot . As reference values, bulk Earth has ( XC,tot , X H,tot ) ≃ (500 , 200) ppmw (B. Marty 2012; B. Marty et al. 2020; M. M. Hirschmann 2018). Or-dinary chondrites have (1200 , 459) ppmw, whereas en-statite chondrites have (4100 , 1309) ppmw (L. Schaefer & J. Fegley 2017). We adopt the ordinary-chondrite values as our fiducial targets. The numerical procedure is shown in Fig. 2. We first estimate the initial mass coordinate and radius of the atmosphere-MO interface using the empirical mass– radius relation for a bare rocky planet, given by Equa-tion (39). We then choose trial values of the lower-boundary pressure Ps and C/H ratio, and solve a spher-ically symmetric atmospheric model at fixed C/O, with C/O = 0.5 or 0.8. This module includes C–H–O chem-ical equilibrium and RCME, and returns the interface state, Ps and Ts. The temperature Ts is also the outer-boundary temperature of the magma ocean, TMO . In spherical geometry, gravity varies with radius and en-closed mass rather than being fixed. For the atmospheric calculation, we set Tint = 0 K and use Teq = 1000 K as the fiducial equilibrium tem-perature, with additional tests near 1200 K. Although lower than the equilibrium temperatures of TOI-561 b and 55 Cnc e, these values are adopted as controlled test cases rather than planet-specific inputs. We use 

Teq = 1000 K to facilitate comparison with the lower-temperature models of B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024), while the 1200 K calculations provide nearby tests of the temperature dependence of vertical mixing. The top boundary is Ptop = 0.1 Pa, τv, top = 10 −9 and 

τth, top = τv, top /γ , where γ = 2 .28 × 10 −3. The top tem-perature follows Equation (28) of T. Guillot (2010), with 

μ∗ = 1 /√3 and T 4irr = 4 T 4eq . To incorporate vertical-mixing energy transport self-consistently, we solve the coupled radiative-transfer and energy-balance equations using the Rybicki complete-linearization scheme (W. Zhong et al. 2025b,a; Z.-T. Zhang et al. 2025a,b) rather than the semi-grey ODE integration used by B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024). We adopt κv = 7 .524 × 10 −6 and 

κth = 3 .3 × 10 −3 cm 2, g−1.We next use Ps, Ts, and the interface mass coordi-nate and radius as the outer-boundary conditions for the MO. The volatile-bearing mantle is computed with the VintEoS. This step determines the internal T–P struc-ture, the melt distribution and the amount of mantle material available for volatile storage. We directly pre-scribe a core-to-bare-rocky-planet mass ratio of 0 .25, such that the mantle contains the remaining 75% of the rocky-planet mass. The mantle thermodynamic structure is then calculated self-consistently for the pre-scribed outer-boundary conditions. As shown in Fig. 1, we define the base of the MO at the local ϕmelt = 0 .4 rheological transition. The corre-sponding MMO is the total mantle mass of the overlying region, where ϕmelt ≥ 0.4. Individual layers are not weighted by their local melt fractions. Together with the atmospheric mass Matm , this gives Mtot . We then compute the C and H masses in the atmosphere and in the MO, and obtain XC,tot and XH,tot . The pre-scribed volatile inventories are therefore partitioned only between the atmosphere and the effective MO, with no separate deep-mantle reservoir. If the calculated XC,tot and XH,tot do not match the target values, we update Ps and C/H and repeat the calculation. The iteration stops when the interface state 10 is self-consistent, the atmosphere and MO are in volatile equilibrium, and the total C and H abundances match the ordinary-chondrite targets.  

> 3.

RESULTS To examine the role of energy input from vertical mix-ing in atmosphere–interior coupling, this section is or-ganized into three parts. § 3.1 discusses the impact of vertical mixing on the planetary atmosphere. § 3.2 in-vestigates how vertical mixing modulates mantle redox control on volatile speciation. § 3.3 analyzes the effect of vertical mixing on the emission spectrum. 3.1. Atmospheric Structure with Mixing in Coupled 

MO+atmosphere Models 

In this section, we test how vertical mixing modi-fies the atmospheric structure. The atmospheric profiles shown here are taken from the coupled MO+atmosphere 

solutions, not from isolated atmosphere models. The magma ocean affects the atmosphere through the shared interface state and the volatile budget. After C- and H-bearing species dissolve into the melt, XC,tot and XH,tot 

constrain the atmospheric C/H ratio, which controls the C–H–O chemical distribution and modifies the atmo-spheric density, heat capacity and T –P structure. We adopt C/O= 0 .55, Teq = 1000 K, and bulk abundances 

XC,tot = 1200 ppmw and XH,tot = 459 ppmw. The re-sults are shown in Fig. 3. In the left panel, the black dotted curve is the non-mixing case and serves as our baseline. We begin by validating the no-mixing limit through comparison with the results reported by B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024). They state an analytic expression for the top boundary temperature, 

Ttop =

"

12 T 4int + 2

√3 T 4eq 1 + 

√32 γ

!# 1/4

, (46) which is derived from the same CE radiative-equilibrium relation used here. For a given Teq , together with Tint 

and γ, this relation fixes Ttop and thus the tempera-ture level near the top of the atmosphere. In our com-parisons, the plotted profile in B. Peng & D. Valen-cia (2024) suggests a top-boundary convention that is not fully specified in the text. To ensure a like-for-like comparison, we adopt a top-boundary condition consistent with the temperature level implied by their plotted profile. With this choice, our no-mixing solu-tion at Teq = 1000 K reproduces both the P –T struc-ture and the major-species mole-fraction profiles of the planet a case shown in Fig. 1 of B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024). This agreement confirms that our implemen-tation matches the established benchmark in the no-mixing limit. Vertical mixing is not generally expected to be uni-form with height. For example, B. Charnay et al. (2015) found an approximate scaling Kzz ∝ P −0.4

for GJ 1214b. Height-dependent profiles of the form 

Kheat zz ∝ [P/ (1 bar)] ζ were examined in our previous study using the same vertical-mixing energy-transport framework (W. Zhong et al. 2025b). In the cases exam-ined there, both increasing and decreasing Kheat zz with altitude retain the lower-atmosphere warming found in the constant- Kheat zz case. When Kheat zz increases with altitude, this warming is weaker than in the constant-

Kheat zz case. When Kheat zz decreases with altitude, the warming is stronger. A sufficiently steep increase in 

Kheat zz with pressure may also generate a temperature inversion in the upper atmosphere. Thus, in those cal-culations, the vertical variation of Kheat zz changes the magnitude and vertical distribution of the thermal re-sponse without changing the tendency to heat the lower atmosphere. We adopt a constant Kheat zz in the present study to isolate the effect of the overall mixing strength. The values Kheat zz = 10 5 and 10 8 cm 2 s−1 are adopted as representative weak- and strong-mixing cases for the sensitivity analysis rather than as observationally constrained values for a specific planet. The temper-ature profiles for these two cases are shown in the left panel of Fig. 3, where the black dotted curve de-notes the non-mixing reference. An additional test with 

Kheat zz = 10 9 cm 2 s−1 produces further warming of the atmosphere–magma-ocean interface, with no clear ev-idence of saturation up to this value. At still larger 

Kheat zz , we could not obtain numerically converged solu-tions satisfying the imposed energy balance, so whether the interface warming eventually saturates remains un-determined. In the no-mixing case, the atmosphere follows the layered picture in Fig. 1. A near-isothermal region at low pressure transitions into a deeper, composition-influenced, near-adiabatic structure. At higher pres-sures, the profile also develops an additional radiative-controlled segment. This segment appears as a new near-isothermal region in the deep atmosphere. Vertical mixing changes the deep thermal structure in a systematic way. Following A. N. Youdin & J. L. Mitchell (2010), we refer to this deep warming as the mechanical greenhouse effect, consistent with Papers I– II (W. Zhong et al. 2025b; Z.-T. Zhang et al. 2025a). The term reflects that vertical mixing drives a downward heat flux that partially offsets outward radiative cooling and retains heat at depth, rather than producing warm-ing through radiative opacity. For Kheat zz = 10 5 cm 2 s−111 

Figure 3. Vertical mixing alters the thermal structure and chemical profiles of an Earth-mass planet. Shown is a planet with solar C/O = 0 .55 and equilibrium temperature Teq = 1000 K, assuming OC total C and H abundances. Left: Pressure–tempera-ture profiles for a no-mixing case (black dotted line) and for two vertically mixed cases with Kheat zz = 10 5 cm 2 s−1 (orange dashed line) and Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s−1 (blue dashed line). Right: Corresponding molar fraction profiles, using the same line styles to indicate each mixing scenario. Colors denote species: O 2 (orange), H 2 (red), H 2O (purple), CO 2 (blue) and CO (green). 

Figure 4. Same as Fig. 3, but with a higher C/O ratio. Identical to Fig. 3, except C/O is set to 0 .80 (line styles and colour coding are unchanged). 12 (orange dashed curve), the upper and middle atmo-sphere remain close to the no-mixing profile. The curve begins to depart at P ∼ 2 × 10 2 bar and the deep at-mosphere becomes warmer. For Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s−1

(green solid curve), the departure occurs at lower pres-sure. The warming at high pressure is much larger. Overall, stronger vertical mixing strengthens the me-chanical greenhouse effect and raises deep-atmosphere temperatures well above the no-mixing reference. The right panel of Fig. 3 shows how vertical mixing changes the molar fraction profiles, yi, in our C–H–O equilibrium model. Line styles match the left panel. The dotted curve is the no-mixing case, the dashed curve is Kheat zz = 10 5 cm 2 s−1, and the solid curve is 

Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s−1. In the no-mixing limit, the yi

profiles reproduce the results of B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024), which provides a baseline check of our imple-mentation. We track six species in the C–H–O network, but omit CH 4 in the right panel of Fig. 3 because its abundance is negligible. The dotted curves show the no-mixing case, whereas the dashed and solid curves correspond to in-creasing values of Kheat zz . In our model, Kheat zz is applied only to energy transport and does not directly transport chemical species. Within each model, C/O and C/H are uniform with height, and all species abundances are cal-culated in local thermochemical equilibrium. The abun-dance differences between the Kheat zz cases therefore arise from mixing-induced changes in the temperature struc-ture rather than from direct compositional mixing. For weak mixing, Kheat zz ≲ 10 5 cm 2 s−1, the upper and middle atmosphere show only minor changes in mo-lar fraction. The main differences appear in the deep atmosphere at P ≳ 2 × 10 2 bar. At a given pressure in this region, the warmer temperature structure in the mixing cases shifts the local equilibrium composition to-ward higher abundances of H 2, O 2, and CO, with the strongest increase in H 2. The H 2O abundance is also slightly enhanced relative to the no-mixing case over part of the deep atmosphere, but it decreases toward higher pressures along each profile, and the different 

Kheat zz cases converge near the lower boundary. By con-trast, the equilibrium abundance of CO 2 is lower in the mixing-modified thermal structure and shows the largest decrease among the carbon-bearing species shown. Stronger mixing amplifies these trends. For Kheat zz =10 8 cm 2 s−1, H 2 and H 2O increase throughout most of the column, although H 2O approaches the no-mixing level at the highest pressures. CO and O 2 still change only modestly, while CO 2 is strongly depleted in the deep atmosphere. These compositional shifts feed back on the lower boundary of the atmosphere. As the deep composi-tion changes, the interface conditions ( Ps, T s) required for a self-consistent match to the volatile-bearing man-tle also change. This is expected because the coupled MO–atmosphere solution is ultimately constrained by the prescribed bulk carbon and hydrogen inventory. Building on the C/O= 0 .55 baseline, we next test how the input C/O ratio modifies the atmosphere and its coupling to the mantle. Changing C/O shifts C–H– O equilibrium partitioning and alters the deep thermal structure, which in turn affects the interface conditions (Ps, T s). Fig. 4 shows the case C/O= 0 .80. We use the same axis limits as Fig. 3 to enable a direct comparison. The temperature response is strongest at high pres-sure in Fig. 4. Even without vertical mixing (black dot-ted curve), C/O = 0 .80 produces a hotter deep radiative, near-isothermal region than in Fig. 3, with tempera-tures exceeding 5000 K. The upper atmosphere changes little, consistent with irradiation control at low pres-sure. When vertical mixing is included, the mechanical-greenhouse heating of the lower atmosphere becomes larger than in the C/O = 0 .55 case. The temperature profile departs from the no-mixing reference at lower pressure and reaches higher temperatures at depth. Compared with the C/O = 0.50 models in Fig. 3, the C/O = 0.80 models in Fig. 4 show a similar re-sponse to vertical mixing, but with stronger changes in several species. As Kheat zz increases, the molar frac-tion of CO 2 is more strongly depleted in the deep at-mosphere, H 2 is more enhanced, and CO changes only modestly. The behavior of H 2O is not monotonic and de-pends on the mixing strength. For the strongest mixing case, Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s−1, H 2O decreases toward the highest-pressure region, whereas the two weaker mix-ing cases show the opposite trend. O 2 increases mainly at depth, consistent with high-temperature dissociation and the resulting shift in local thermochemical equilib-rium among oxygen-bearing species. Overall, higher C/O amplifies deep-atmosphere heat-ing and strengthens the associated compositional shifts. For example, at Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s−1 and P = 10 3 bar, the C /O = 0 .80 model is approximately 1800 K hotter than the C /O = 0 .50 model. This temperature contrast becomes larger toward the atmosphere–MO interface, leading to different self-consistent values of ( Ps, T s) and making the coupled solution strongly sensitive to C/O. 3.2. Vertical Mixing Mantle Redox Controls on Volatile Speciation 

The mantle redox state of a MO exoplanet shapes the atmospheric composition of a “puffy Venus”. Verti-13 

Figure 5. Impact of vertical mixing on the partitioning of volatile carbon and hydrogen as a function of the C/O ratio in a puffy, Venus-like exoplanet analogous to 55 Cnc e, assuming OC abundances. Dotted lines indicate the case without vertical mixing, while dashed and solid lines correspond to mixing strengths of Kheat zz = 10 5 cm 2 s−1 and 10 8 cm 2 s−1, respectively. (A) 

MO surface pressure Ps as a function of C/O ratio. (B) Mass of dissolved gas species Mi,s at the MO surface. (C) Partial pressures of major gas species Pi,s at MO surface. (D) MO surface temperature Ts as a function of C/O ratio. 

Figure 6. Effect of vertical mixing on the top-of-atmosphere mole fractions yi, ToA , evaluated at P = 0 .1 Pa for the case of a 55 Cnc e–like planet with Teq = 1200 K. The model parameters, colours and line styles are the same as in Fig. 5. 

cal mixing further modifies the coupled atmosphere–MO structure through energy transport. We quantify these effects using a fiducial planet motivated by 55 Cnc e, with Ms = 7 .9 M⊕ and an atmosphere–MO interface ra-dius of Rs = 1 .75 R⊕. The value of Rs is calculated from Equation (39) using the mass–radius prescription of B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024). We vary C/O from 0.98 to 0 .30, spanning moderately reducing to highly oxidizing MO conditions, and adopt Kheat zz = 0, 10 5

and 10 8 cm 2 s−1. Fig. 5 shows how C/O and vertical mixing affect the atmospheric thermal structure, MO– atmosphere exchange, atmospheric column mass, near-surface speciation, and volatile storage in the MO. In contrast to the near-linear decrease in Ps with increas-ing C/O shown for Earth-mass planets in Fig. 3a of B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024), this more massive planet does not follow the same trend. As described in Section 2.4, the dissolved mass frac-tion Xi of each volatile species depends on the inter-face pressure Ps and the local mole fraction yi, s. We therefore examine Ps and the species partial pressures 

Pi, s = yi, sPs before discussing the dissolved volatile masses. This links the gas-side pressure and compo-sition to the melt-side volatile reservoir. 14 Fig. 5 (A) and (C) show how vertical mixing changes the gas-side conditions at the MO surface. Fig. 5 (A) 

gives the total interface pressure Ps, while Fig. 5 (C) de-composes it into species partial pressures Pi, s. Without mixing, CO provides the largest pressure contribution for C/O ≃ 0.6–1, CO 2 contributes mainly near C/O 

≃ 0.5, O 2 dominates at the oxidizing end, and H 2 is important only at the most reducing end. Because at-mospheric C/O is used here as a proxy for mantle redox state, these no-mixing speciation trends are broadly con-sistent with previous magma-ocean studies showing that the relative abundances of reduced and oxidized gases depend on temperature and oxygen fugacity (P. A. Sossi et al. 2020; H. Nicholls et al. 2026b). The corresponding 

Ps decreases with C/O for C/O < 0.5, but increases for C/O > 0.5. Vertical mixing changes both Ps and its partitioning among species. For Kheat zz = 10 5 cm 2 s−1, mixing gen-erally raises Ps, especially at low C/O. For Kheat zz =10 8 cm 2 s−1, it further raises Ps at the oxidizing end, but can reduce it relative to the no-mixing case for C/O > 0.5. Mixing also increases the near-surface par-tial pressures of O 2 and H 2, reduces CO 2, and shifts CO in opposite directions: CO increases at the oxidiz-ing end but decreases slightly for C/O ≃ 0.6–1. Thus, mixing does not simply increase the atmospheric col-umn mass. It redistributes the gas-side pressure among volatile species and changes which species dominate dis-solution into the MO. Fig. 5 (B) shows the resulting volatile masses dis-solved in the MO. At fixed C/O, hydrogen is prefer-entially retained in the MO, mainly as dissolved H 2O, whereas carbon is more strongly partitioned into the at-mosphere. Mixing increases the dissolved masses of H 2

and CO in the MO, while CO 2 is preferentially retained in the atmosphere. This contrast is strongest at high C/O. Fig. 5 (D) shows the surface temperature Ts. The temperature turns over near C/O = 0 .5. For C/O < 0.5, 

Ts decreases with increasing C/O, and mixing raises Ts.For C/O > 0.5, Ts increases with C/O, and stronger mixing gives a larger temperature increase. The in-crease in Ts is driven by the mechanically induced down-ward flux Fmix . Its pressure derivative, dF mix /dP , is the only term through which Kheat zz directly enters the en-ergy balance. The radiative and convective fluxes ad-just to the resulting thermal structure. Here, Kheat zz 

does not directly transport chemical species. Instead, their abundances respond to the modified temperature through thermochemical equilibrium. During the struc-tural calculation, these abundance changes do not feed back through opacity because the mean opacities are fixed. In the subsequent spectral calculation, the con-verged T–P and abundance profiles are used to compute wavelength-dependent opacities and emission spectra. In the strongest-mixing cases, the near-surface tem-perature can reach regimes where rock vapour may be-come important, often at T ≳ 5000 K. All atmospheric layers considered here remain above 500 K. Gas–liquid condensation is therefore not expected for H 2, O 2, CO, CO 2, or CH 4. H2O condensation could in principle occur where T < 647 K and its partial pressure ex-ceeds the saturation vapour pressure, but this process is not included or explicitly evaluated in the present model. Condensable rock vapour could introduce ad-ditional compositional gradients and modify the deep 

P –T structure (W. Misener et al. 2023). For the hottest planets, the MO surface may approach or exceed the silicate critical region, making the predicted pressure, composition and atmospheric thickness sensitive to the equation of state, chemical network and definition of the atmosphere–magma boundary. In our hottest mod-els, Fig. 5 (A) and (D) show that Ps ≳ 10 4 bar and 

Ts > 7000 K. These conditions exceed the estimated critical pressure and temperature ranges of 80–130 MPa and 6500–7000 K for bulk-silicate-Earth-like material (R. Caracas & S. T. Stewart 2023), indicating that the nominal atmosphere–MO interface enters the estimated supercritical-silicate regime. Further ab initio calcula-tions and high-pressure experiments are needed to test this regime. In summary, vertical mixing is a key mediator between the MO redox state and the atmospheric structure of a “puffy Venus”. By coupling transport and thermochem-istry at the MO–atmosphere interface, mixing reshapes the atmospheric column mass, near-surface composition, volatile partitioning, and surface temperature in a C/O-dependent way (Fig. 5). It generally raises Ps and Ts,but vigorous mixing can reduce Ps for C/O > 0.5, show-ing that mixing changes not only the atmospheric col-umn mass but also the distribution of volatiles between the atmosphere and the MO. 3.3. The effect of mixing on the emission spectrum 

Before turning to the emission spectra, we first ex-amine the upper-atmosphere composition for the same model grid as in Fig. 5. We evaluate the mole fractions 

yi, ToA at P = 0 .1 Pa, the upper boundary adopted in our model and by B. Peng & D. Valencia (2024). For the high-Teq cases considered here, a comparison with 

P = 100 Pa gives the same qualitative trends because the abundance changes induced by mixing-related heat-ing are small at both pressure levels. In the no-mixing baseline, CO is favoured at high C/O, O 2 at low C/O, 15 2 4 6 8 10 12 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 Fp/F s [ppm] Teq = 1500 K Kheat zz = 0.0 cm 2/s Kheat zz = 1x10 8 cm 2/s C/O = 0.5 C/O = 0.8 

2 4 6 8 10 12 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 Fp/F s [ppm] Teq = 1000 K 2 4 6 8 10 12 Wavelength (μm) 0246810 12 14 16 Fp/F s [ppm] Teq = 625 K 

# Emission Spectrum (M2.0)     

> Figure 7. Planet–star flux ratio for the puffy-Venuse (M2.0, 2.0 M⊕) showing the effect of vertical mixing: solid and dotted lines correspond to models with and without mixing respectively, gray dashed lines indicate blackbody emission, panels from top to bottom show Teq = 1500, 1000, and 625 K, and blue/red lines represent C/O = 0.5/0.8.

CO 2 peaks near C/O ≈ 0.5, and H 2 becomes appre-ciable mainly at the most reducing end. With mixing, the ToA abundances of CO and O 2 change only mod-estly, whereas H 2O and H 2 are more sensitive and show a turnover near C/O ≈ 0.6. Fig. 6 therefore provides a common upper-atmosphere compositional diagnostic. The 0 .1 Pa level is not intended to represent a charac-teristic emission pressure, and the spectra are calculated using the full atmospheric profiles. We use the calculated temperature-pressure profiles and elemental abundances as inputs to the 1D radia-tive transfer forward model POSEIDON 11 python package (R. J. MacDonald & N. Madhusudhan 2017; R. J. Mac-Donald 2023; L.-P. Coulombe et al. 2023). Emission spectra are then calculated assuming the planetary pa-rameters of TOI-561 b and 55 Cnc e, together with the stellar parameters of their respective host stars. We note that since the opacity database used by POSEIDON is lim-ited to temperatures below 2000 K and pressures below 100 bar, we restrict our spectra calculations to atmo-spheric layers with pressures ≤100 bar. This is unlikely to affect the observable spectrum, as the photosphere  

> 11 https://github.com/MartianColonist/POSEIDON

16 0246810 12 

> Fp/Fs [ppm]

(a) 

Teq = 625 K, C/O = 0.8          

> Full spectrum, Kheat zz = 0 cm 2s1
> Full spectrum, Kheat zz = 10 8cm 2s1
> CO 2
> CO O2
> H2OCH 4

CH 4

CO CO 2

CO 2

CO CH 4 CO 2

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Wavelength [ m] 

non-mix mix Molecular match bands (b) 

Figure 8. Emission spectra and opacity-source diagnostics for the M2.0 model with C/O = 0.8 and Teq = 625 K. (a) Full plan-et-to-star flux spectra without vertical mixing ( Kheat zz = 0 cm 2 s−1, solid black) and with vertical mixing Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s−1,dashed red). Molecular labels mark representative wavelength regions where individual-opacity spectra reproduce features in the full spectrum. (b) Barcode-style match bands show wavelength intervals where spectra computed with only one molecular opacity source retained closely match the corresponding full spectrum for the non-mixed and mixed cases. Colors indicate CO 2,CO, O 2, H 2O, and CH 4; gray regions indicate wavelengths where no single molecular opacity source alone closely reproduces the full spectrum, suggesting combined opacity effects from multiple sources. Compared with the case without vertical mixing, an expanded or more prominent match band in the mixed case can indirectly indicate an enhanced influence of the corresponding opacity source on the emergent spectrum. The match bands are diagnostic and should not be interpreted as direct opacity strengths or additive molecular contributions. 10 11 10 9 10 7 10 5 10 3 10 1                

> Molar fraction yi
> 10 5
> 10 4
> 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 10 0
> 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> Pressure [bar]
> Pressure contribution to Fp/Fs
> = 7.1-8.8 m
> P0.007-0.2 bar
> M2.0
> Teq =625 K C/O=0.80
> CO O2
> CO 2
> H2
> H2OCH 4
> Kheat zz = 0 cm 2s1
> Kheat zz = 10 8cm 2s1

Figure 9. Molar fraction profiles for the M 2.0, 

Teq = 625 K, C /O = 0 .80 case. Solid and dashed lines show 

Kheat zz = 10 8 and 0 cm 2 s−1, respectively. The grey region marks the pressure range ( P ≃ 0.007–0 .2 bar) contributing most to Fp/F s at 7 .1–8 .8 μm. Molecular colors match Fig. 8. 

typically resides at pressures ≤100 bar. For atmospheric regions where the temperature exceeds 2000 K in the deeper atmosphere, we assume an isothermal profile of 2000 K. Figure 7 shows the thermal emission spectra of the 2.0 M⊕ model (M2.0), presented as a TOI-561 b-like case study. For this case, we adopt a planetary radius of 

Rp = 1 .397 R⊕ and a stellar radius of R⋆ = 0 .843 R⊙

(G. Piotto et al. 2024). The host star has an effec-tive temperature of Teff ,⋆ = 5432 K, a metallicity of [Fe /H] = −0.303, and a surface gravity of log g⋆ = 4 .451 (cgs) (M. G. MacDougall et al. 2023). The spectra are plotted as the planet-to-star flux ratio, Fp/F ⋆, as a func-tion of wavelength. In the high-Teq case ( Teq = 1500 K), vertical mixing has little effect on the spectrum: for a fixed C/O ratio, the mixed and non-mixed cases are nearly identical. This suggests that, at high Teq , the mixing-induced changes in thermal structure and equi-librium chemistry are too small to produce an appre-ciable spectral response. At the intermediate equilib-17 2 4 6 8 10 12 020 40 60 80 Fp/F s [ppm] Teq = 1500 K 

# Kheat zz = 0.0 cm 2/s Kheat zz = 1x10 8 cm 2/s C/O = 0.5 C/O = 0.8 

2 4 6 8 10 12 010 20 30 40 50 60 70 Fp/F s [ppm] Teq = 1200 K 2 4 6 8 10 12 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 Fp/F s [ppm] Teq = 800 K 2 4 6 8 10 12 Wavelength (μm) 0510 15 20 25 Fp/F s [ppm] Teq = 700 K 

# Emission Spectrum (M7.9) 

Figure 10. Effect of vertical mixing on the emission spectrum (planet–star flux ratio) for M7.9 (7 .9 M⊕). The calculations adopt the planetary and stellar parameters of 55 Cnc e. Solid and dotted lines show models with and without vertical mix-ing, respectively, and the gray dashed line marks blackbody emission. Panels from top to bottom correspond to equilibrium temperatures of 1500, 1200, 800, and 700 K. Colors are the same as in Fig. 7. 18 0510 15 20 25 30 35 

> Fp/Fs [ppm]

(a) 

Teq = 800 K, C/O = 0.8 

Full spectrum, Kheat zz = 0 cm 2 s 1

Full spectrum, Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s 1

CO 2

CO O2

H2OCH 4

CO CO 2

CO CO 2

H2OCO 2

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Wavelength [ m] 

non-mix mix Molecular match bands (b) 

Figure 11. Same as Fig. 8, but for the M7.9 model with C/O = 0.8 and Teq = 800 , K, comparing Kheat zz 0 and 10 8 cm 2 s−1.0510 15 20 25 30 

> Fp/Fs [ppm]

(a) 

Teq = 700 K, C/O = 0.8 

Full spectrum, Kheat zz = 0 cm 2 s 1

Full spectrum, Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s 1

CO 2

CO O2

H2OCH 4

CO CO 2

CO CO 2

H2OCO 2

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Wavelength [ m] 

non-mix mix Molecular match bands (b) 

Figure 12. Same as Fig. 8, but for the M7.9 model with C/O = 0.8 and Teq = 700 , K, comparing Kheat zz = 0 and 10 8 cm 2 s−1.19 rium temperature, Teq = 1200 K, vertical mixing has a stronger spectral effect. The mixed cases show a lower 

Fp/F ⋆ than the non-mixed cases for all adopted C/O ra-tios. In the low-Teq case ( Teq = 625 K), vertical mixing produces a strong and wavelength-dependent change in the emission spectrum. For C/O = 0.5, mixing increases 

Fp/F ⋆ near 3 .5–4 .0 μm and 7 .5–9 μm, indicating higher atmospheric transparency and lower effective opacity in these bands. At other wavelengths, especially between 9 and 12 μm, the flux decreases, indicating lower trans-parency and higher effective opacity. For C/O = 0.8, the effect is stronger: mixing suppresses Fp/F ⋆ across most of 4–12 μm. This increasing sensitivity to vertical mixing toward lower Teq reflects the temperature dependence of the opacity. In the high-Teq model, the opacity structure de-pends only weakly on Teq , consistent with the electron-scattering opacity becoming saturated. The abundance changes introduced by vertical mixing therefore do not substantially modify the wavelength-dependent effective opacity in the mid-infrared emitting regions, and the mixed and non-mixed spectra remain similar. At lower 

Teq , the opacity varies more steeply with the local ther-mal and chemical structure. Vertical mixing changes the mole fractions of the main molecular absorbers within the pressure ranges sampled by the emission spectrum, producing larger variations in effective opacity, reducing atmospheric transparency and suppressing Fp/F ⋆. Be-cause this suppression is strongest for C/O = 0.8 in the low-Teq case, we focus on this case below. The lower mid-infrared flux in the mixed C/O = 0.8 spectrum is therefore consistent with the larger opacity changes discussed above. However, the modified T –P

structure can also affect the emergent spectrum through the thermal source function. Because the opacity and thermal-structure effects are coupled in the present cal-culations, we do not quantify their relative contributions here. The following single-species spectra are therefore used to identify the molecular opacity sources associated with the wavelength-dependent spectral features, rather than to separate the opacity contribution from the effect of the modified thermal structure. The resulting equi-librium abundance changes do not create new spectral bands, but change the relative contributions of exist-ing bands from CO 2, CO, and CH 4. Where the effective opacity increases, the atmosphere becomes less transpar-ent and the emergent flux decreases. Where the opacity is reduced, radiation can emerge from deeper and hotter layers, producing a local flux increase. Vertical mixing does not create new spectral bands, but changes the relative contributions of existing bands from CO 2, CO, and CH 4. To identify the molecular origin of the opacity variations, we examine the single-species spectra in Fig. 8. This diagnostic is not a linear decomposition of the full spectrum (Fig. 8a). Instead, it identifies the dominant molecular contributors to the opacity over different wavelength intervals. The primary differences occur in the carbon-bearing molecules shown in Fig. 8b. CO 2 and CO dominate much of the 4 .1– 5.2 μm region, whereas CH 4 becomes important near 3.1–4 .0 μm and 7 .1–8 .8 μm. CO 2 remains important at 9–10 μm. In the M2.0 model with C/O = 0.8, vertical mixing produces its strongest local suppression of Fp/F ⋆ in the 7.1–8 .8 μm band. This is the same wavelength inter-val in which the single-species diagnostic identifies CH 4

as an important opacity source. To explain why this CH 4 feature appears in the low-Teq spectrum but is not prominent in the high-Teq spectra, we examine the verti-cal mole-fraction profiles in Fig. 9. The full yi–P profiles are shown because the emission at a given wavelength is shaped by a finite pressure range, rather than by the abundance at a single ToA level. The grey band in Fig. 9 marks the pressure region that contributes most strongly to the 7 .1–8 .8 μm emission, approximately 0 .007–0 .2 bar. Within this region, the Kheat zz = 10 8 cm 2 s−1 model has a higher CH 4 mole fraction than the no-mixing case. The enhanced CH 4 abundance increases the effective opacity in the same pressure region sampled by this wavelength band, explaining why vertical mixing suppresses Fp/F ⋆

most strongly at 7 .1–8 .8 μm. The CH 4 feature in Fig. 8 is therefore not abrupt, it reflects the low-Teq enhance-ment of CH 4 opacity within the relevant emitting layers. With mixing, the single-species matches become nar-rower or less continuous in several wavelength intervals. This does not imply weaker total opacity. Instead, it shows that the opacity is no longer controlled by one molecule over a broad wavelength range. The mixed full spectrum remains fainter because the combined ef-fective opacity of overlapping CO 2, CO and CH 4 bands is stronger. Vertical mixing therefore redistributes the opacity contribution among carbon-bearing molecules and suppresses the C/O = 0.8 mid-infrared emission. To test whether the same mechanism operates at higher planetary mass, we calculated the emission spec-tra for the 7 .9 M⊕ model (M7.9; Fig. 10), represent-ing a 55 Cnc e-like planet. For this case, we adopt a planetary radius of Rp = 1 .875 R⊕ (V. Bourrier et al. 2018). The host-star parameters are R⋆ = 0 .980 R⊙,

Teff ,⋆ = 5198 K, and log g⋆ = 4 .30 (cgs) (C. Moutou et al. 2026), with a metallicity of [Fe /H] = 0 .37 (L. L. Zhao et al. 2023). The overall spectral behavior is simi-lar to that of M2.0, but the response to vertical mixing is larger. This stronger response reflects the combined 20 effects of the larger gravity and the different internal structure of the M7.9 planet. For the same Kheat zz , the larger gravity directly enhances the mixing-induced heat transport through Equation (16). The resulting thermal perturbation, acting on the different hydrostatic struc-ture of the more massive planet, leads to larger changes in the C–H–O equilibrium abundances and molecular opacity. At Teq = 1500 K, the M7.9 mixed and non-mixed spectra remain nearly identical. As in M2.0, this in-dicates that vertical mixing does not strongly modify the wavelength-dependent effective opacity when Teq is high. As Teq decreases, the effect of vertical mixing becomes progressively stronger, producing increasingly large spectral differences. The M7.9 sequence there-fore follows the same high–low Teq contrast found in M2.0. At high Teq , the opacity is only weakly affected by the abundance changes introduced by vertical mix-ing. At lower Teq , the opacity responds more strongly to the local thermal and chemical structure, so mixing-induced changes in molecular abundances produce larger changes in atmospheric transparency and thermal emis-sion. The largest mixed–non-mixed separations occur at 

Teq = 800 K and Teq = 700 K, particularly for C/O = 0.8. In these models, vertical mixing suppresses Fp/F ⋆

over broad mid-infrared wavelength ranges, indicating substantial changes in the atmospheric opacity struc-ture. We therefore focus on the C/O = 0.8 cases to investigate the molecular origin of these spectral varia-tions. At Teq = 800 , K, the M7.9 model shows CO 2, CO, and H 2O as the main opacity sources (Fig. 11). Com-pared with the non-mixed model, the wavelength inter-vals associated with these molecules become less con-tinuous after vertical mixing, particularly for H 2O. At the same time, the full emission spectrum exhibits both local flux enhancements and suppression. This behav-ior suggests that the opacity changes associated with vertical mixing are not uniform across wavelength. In-stead, vertical mixing changes the relative importance of different opacity sources, contributing to the strongly wavelength-dependent spectral response. At Teq = 700 K, the M7.9 model shows a substan-tially stronger response to vertical mixing(Fig. 12). The mixed spectrum is systematically fainter across much of the 4–10 μm range, indicating lower atmospheric trans-parency and a stronger net opacity effect. The dominant opacity sources are primarily CO 2 and CO, while CH 4

contributes over several narrower wavelength intervals. Compared with the Teq = 800 K model, many molecu-lar matching regions become shorter or fragmented after mixing. However, the overall suppression of Fp/F ⋆ is sig-nificantly larger, implying that the combined opacity of multiple absorbers becomes more effective at reducing the escaping thermal radiation. Overall, the M7.9 results support the same physical picture inferred from M2.0. Vertical mixing modifies the vertical abundance distributions of the major opac-ity carriers and changes their relative contributions to the wavelength-dependent effective opacity. As Teq de-creases, the opacity becomes more sensitive to the lo-cal thermal and chemical structure, so the abundance changes introduced by vertical mixing produce larger changes in atmospheric transparency and thermal emis-sion. The resulting spectral variations therefore arise from the combined effects of multiple overlapping opac-ity sources, rather than from the strengthening of a sin-gle molecular absorber alone. Although the M2.0 and M7.9 models are motivated by TOI-561 b and 55 Cnc e, respectively, they are not intended as best-fit models. Our 1D calculations illus-trate how gravity-wave-driven vertical mixing and its associated energy transport modify atmospheric struc-ture, equilibrium composition, and thermal emission. Whether the resulting spectral differences are detectable with JWST depends on the observing mode and the pre-cision achieved. We have not assessed this detectabil-ity and therefore do not claim that a particular JWST instrument can distinguish these differences. Beyond our 1D treatment, future studies combining multidimen-sional models with phase-curve observations could inves-tigate how atmospheric circulation shapes the spatial distribution of temperature and composition.  

> 4.

CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION Our results show that the atmosphere–interior cou-pling of puffy Venuses cannot be understood from radia-tive transfer and chemical equilibrium alone. Vertical energy transport provides an additional non-radiative heating pathway, with atmospheric circulation and gravity-wave breaking representing possible dynamical origins in the radiative zone. This process warms the deep atmosphere and the magma-ocean surface, and lowers the stellar irradiation threshold required to main-tain surface melting. At the same time, the associated thermal changes modify the chemical structure of C–H– O atmospheres by enhancing H 2, O 2, and CO in the deep atmosphere while suppressing CO 2, and by chang-ing volatile partitioning between the atmosphere and the magma ocean. The strength of these responses fur-ther depends on the atmospheric C/O ratio, pointing to a nonlinear coupling among atmospheric dynamics, volatile speciation, and planetary redox state. 21 These findings yield observable signatures. Vertical energy transport ( Kheat zz ) strongly alters the thermal emission spectra of highly irradiated rocky planets by changing key species abundances and redistributing at-mospheric heat. This effect is strongest in the higher-mass 7 .9 M⊕ model at low temperature, around Teq ≈

700 K. In this regime, the associated thermal changes strongly modify the equilibrium distribution of the main C–H–O species. For high C/O, these changes reduce mid-infrared transparency by redistributing the opacity contributions of CO, CO 2, and H 2O, thereby suppress-ing Fp/F ⋆ over a broad wavelength range. Thus, vertical energy transport has a stronger impact on the thermal emission spectrum than in the 2 .0 M⊕ model. The vertical energy transport considered here is there-fore not a minor correction in lava-world atmosphere models. Rather, it can substantially modify the vertical temperature structure, equilibrium atmospheric compo-sition, and mid- to far-infrared emission spectra of these planets. These mass-dependent differences suggest that vertical energy transport can produce more prominent spectral signatures in higher-mass planets such as 55 Cnc e compared to lower-mass worlds like TOI-561 b. Such differences may provide useful targets for future in-frared observations, although their detectability will de-pend on observational precision and instrumental char-acteristics. This study nonetheless has several limitations. The current framework does not yet include a multi-band one-dimensional spectral treatment (S. Gandhi & N. Madhusudhan 2017b), photochemistry (J. Mang et al. 2026), or chemical disequilibrium. In real atmospheres, dynamical processes can drive vertical tracer transport and thereby modify the distribution of chemical species (X. Zhang & A. P. Showman 2018a,b; X. Zhang 2020). Large-scale atmospheric circulation can contribute to this transport (X. Zhang & A. P. Showman 2018a,b; X. Zhang 2020), while gravity-wave breaking and wave-driven circulation may provide additional sources of ver-tical mixing (J. I. Moses 2014; X. Zhang 2020). If such transport becomes faster than the chemical reactions re-quired to maintain local equilibrium, species can become chemically quenched and depart from thermochemical equilibrium (C. Visscher & J. I. Moses 2011; J. I. Moses 2014). These compositional transport processes are not included in the present framework, in which Kheat  

> zz

repre-sents thermal-energy transport only. In our latest work, we have begun to quantify the effect of vertical mix-ing in one-dimensional spectral models 12 . Future stud-ies will extend the present framework by coupling it to magma ocean–mantle evolution and by including chem-ical disequilibrium and photochemical processes. These additions should enable a more realistic description of transmission spectra, transit radii, and the signatures of primary transit and secondary eclipse. Among the known candidate puffed-up rocky planets, TOI-561 b and 55 Cnc e are particularly important be-cause both are highly irradiated and underdense. TOI-561 b supports the theoretical plausibility of radius in-flation by a carbon-rich atmosphere, whereas 55 Cnc e provides a stronger observational benchmark because JWST observations have already suggested a CO/CO 2-rich atmosphere (B. Peng & D. Valencia 2024). We therefore adopt 55 Cnc e as the main target for future work. In a coupled atmosphere–magma-ocean–mantle framework, mineral clouds may also form above the magma ocean (E. K. H. Lee et al. 2025) when refractory species outgas from the molten surface and condense at higher, cooler altitudes. Such clouds could further mod-ify both the atmospheric structure and the observable spectra. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work has been supported by the the National Nat-ural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12503068, 42578010, and T2495234), the Basic Research Program of Jiangsu (Grant No. BK20251249), the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation (Grant 2023A1515110805), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. 2026300367), and the Science and Technology Development Fund, Macau SAR (File No. 0139/2024/RIA2). C.Y. has been supported by the National SKA Program of China (Grant No. 2022SKA0120101), the Na-tional Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 12288102, 11873103, and 12373071), the sci-ence research grants from the China Manned Space Project (No. CMS-CSST-2021-B09, CMS-CSST-2021-B12, and CMS-CSST-2021-A10), the Interna-tional Centre of Supernovae, Yunnan Key Laboratory (No.202302AN360001). MTM acknowledges support from the Croucher Postdoctoral Fellowship, funded by the Croucher Foundation. APPENDIX  

> 12 Zhang et al. 2026, in preparation.

22 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000           

> Temperature (K)
> 40
> 30
> 20
> 10
> 010 20
> log 10  Keq
> extrapolated above 6000 K
> CO + 12O2CO 2
> H2+12O2H2O
> CO 2+ 2H 2CH 4+ O 2

Figure 13. Equilibrium constants for the three gas-phase reactions as functions of temperature. The values are cal-culated from the NIST Shomate thermochemical data for a standard state of 1 bar. The shaded region denotes 

T > 6000 K, where the NIST-based thermochemical data are linearly extrapolated. A. TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCE OF THE EQUILIBRIUM CONSTANTS The equilibrium constants for CO + 0.5 O 2 −−⇀↽−− CO 2

and H 2 + 0.5 O 2 −−⇀↽−− H2O decrease with increasing tem-perature, whereas that for CO 2 + 2 H 2 −−⇀↽−− CH 4 + O 2

increases with temperature. These curves provide a di-rect check of the thermochemical functions implemented in the model. The atmospheric abundances are not de-termined by Keq (T ) alone, but also depend on the local pressure, C/O and C/H ratios, and non-ideal fugacities. REFERENCES 

Abe, Y., & Matsui, T. 1986, J. Geophys. Res., 91, E291, doi: 10.1029/JB091iB13p0E291 Ballhaus, C., Berry, R. F., & Green, D. H. 1991, Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 107, 27, doi: 10.1007/BF00311183 Bond, J. C., O’Brien, D. P., & Lauretta, D. S. 2010, ApJ, 715, 1050, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/715/2/1050 Bourrier, V., Dumusque, X., Dorn, C., et al. 2018, A&A, 619, A1, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833154 Bower, D. J., Hakim, K., Sossi, P. A., & Sanan, P. 2022, PSJ, 3, 93, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac5fb1 Bower, D. J., Thompson, M. A., Hakim, K., Tian, M., & Sossi, P. A. 2025, ApJ, 995, 59, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae1479 Caracas, R., & Stewart, S. T. 2023, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 608, 118014, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2023.118014 Charnay, B., Meadows, V., & Leconte, J. 2015, ApJ, 813, 15, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/813/1/15 Coulombe, L.-P., Benneke, B., Challener, R., et al. 2023, Nature, 620, 292, doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06230-1 Coy, B. P., Kite, E. S., & Graham, R. J. 2025, PSJ, 6, 218, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/adf643 Denbigh, K. G. 1981, The Principles of Chemical Equilibrium: With Applications in Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, 4th edn. (Cambridge University Press) Duan, Z., Møller, N., & Weare, J. H. 1996, GeoCoA, 60, 1209, doi: 10.1016/0016-7037(96)00004-X Duan, Z., M ˜A¸ller, N., & Weare, J. H. 1992, Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 56, 2605, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/0016-7037(92)90347-L Elkins-Tanton, L. T. 2008, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 271, 181, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2008.03.062 Farhat, M., Auclair-Desrotour, P., Bou´ e, G., Lichtenberg, T., & Laskar, J. 2025, ApJ, 979, 133, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9b93 Farhat, M., & Chiang, E. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2601.07080, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2601.07080 Gaillard, F., Malavergne, V., Bouhifd, M. A., & Rogerie, G. 2022a, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 577, 117266, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2021.117266 Gaillard, F., Bernadou, F., Roskosz, M., et al. 2022b, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 577, 117255, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2021.117255 Gandhi, S., & Madhusudhan, N. 2017a, MNRAS, 472, 2334, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1601 Gandhi, S., & Madhusudhan, N. 2017b, MNRAS, 472, 2334, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1601 Guillot, T. 2010, A&A, 520, A27, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913396 Hakim, K., Bower, D. J., Seidler, F. L., & Sossi, P. A. 2026, MNRAS, 546, stag133, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag133 Heng, K., Lyons, J. R., & Tsai, S.-M. 2016, ApJ, 816, 96, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/816/2/96 Hirschmann, M. M. 2018, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 502, 262, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2018.08.023 23 

Hirschmann, M. M. 2021, GeoCoA, 313, 74, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2021.08.039 Hu, R., Bello-Arufe, A., Zhang, M., et al. 2024, Nature, 630, 609, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07432-x Hubeny, I. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 841, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx758 Hubeny, I., & Mihalas, D. 2014, Theory of Stellar Atmospheres Kippenhahn, R., & Weigert, A. 1990, Stellar Structure and Evolution Lai, Y., Kang, W., Yang, J., & Tan, X. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.00535, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.00535 Lee, E. K. H., Werlen, A., & Dorn, C. 2025, ApJL, 990, L43, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adfe62 Lichtenberg, T., Bower, D. J., Hammond, M., et al. 2021a, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 126, e06711, doi: 10.1029/2020JE006711 Lichtenberg, T., Bower, D. J., Hammond, M., et al. 2021b, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 126, e06711, doi: 10.1029/2020JE006711 Lichtenberg, T., Schaefer, L., Krissansen-Totton, J., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2511.16142, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2511.16142 MacDonald, R. J. 2023, The Journal of Open Source Software, 8, 4873, doi: 10.21105/joss.04873 MacDonald, R. J., & Madhusudhan, N. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 1979, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx804 MacDougall, M. G., Petigura, E. A., Gilbert, G. J., et al. 2023, AJ, 166, 33, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/acd557 Madhusudhan, N. 2012, ApJ, 758, 36, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/758/1/36 Mang, J., Batalha, N. E., Morley, C. V., et al. 2026, ApJ, 1000, 98, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae47ff Marty, B. 2012, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 313-314, 56, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2011.10.040 Marty, B., Almayrac, M., Barry, P. H., et al. 2020, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 551, 116574, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2020.116574 Maurice, M., Dasgupta, R., & Hassanzadeh, P. 2024, A&A, 688, A47, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347749 Medvedev, A. S., & Klaassen, G. P. 2003, Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres, 108, ACL 4, doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2002JD002504 Meier, T. G., Guimond, C. M., Pierrehumbert, R. T., et al. 2026, MNRAS, 547, stag390, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag390 Misener, W., Schlichting, H. E., & Young, E. D. 2023, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 524, 981, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1910 Monteux, J., Andrault, D., & Samuel, H. 2016, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 448, 140, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2016.05.010 Morschhauser, A., Grott, M., & Breuer, D. 2011, Icarus, 212, 541, doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2010.12.028 Moses, J. I. 2014, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, 372, 20130073, doi: 10.1098/rsta.2013.0073 Moutou, C., Petit, P., Charpentier, P., et al. 2026, A&A, 705, A190, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202556146 Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., Chatterjee, R. D., et al. 2026a, Nature Astronomy, 10, 809, doi: 10.1038/s41550-026-02815-8 Nicholls, H., Pierrehumbert, R., & Lichtenberg, T. 2025a, The Journal of Open Source Software, 10, 7726, doi: 10.21105/joss.07726 Nicholls, H., Pierrehumbert, R. T., Lichtenberg, T., Soucasse, L., & Smeets, S. 2025b, MNRAS, 536, 2957, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2772 Nicholls, H., Krissansen-Totton, J., Lichtenberg, T., et al. 2026b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2606.24757, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2606.24757 Peng, B., & Valencia, D. 2024, ApJ, 976, 202, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad6f03 Piotto, G., Zingales, T., Borsato, L., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 535, 2763, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2440 Plotnykov, M., & Valencia, D. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 932, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa2615 Schaefer, L., & Fegley, Bruce, J. 2017, ApJ, 843, 120, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa784f Schaefer, L., Wordsworth, R. D., Berta-Thompson, Z., & Sasselov, D. 2016, ApJ, 829, 63, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/829/2/63 Seo, C., Ito, Y., & Fujii, Y. 2024, ApJ, 975, 14, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad7461 Sossi, P. A., Burnham, A. D., Badro, J., et al. 2020, Science Advances, 6, eabd1387, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd1387 Strobel, D. F., Summers, M. E., Bevilacqua, R. M., Deland, M. T., & Allen, M. 1987, J. Geophys. Res., 92, 6691, doi: 10.1029/JD092iD06p06691 Teske, J. K., Wallack, N. L., Piette, A. A. A., et al. 2025, ApJL, 995, L39, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae0a4c Thermodynamics Research Center, N. B. L. 2021, Thermodynamics Source Database, doi: 10.18434/T4D303 Tian, M., & Heng, K. 2024, ApJ, 963, 157, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad217c Valencia, D., Sasselov, D. D., & O’Connell, R. J. 2007, ApJ, 656, 545, doi: 10.1086/509800 24 

Visscher, C., & Moses, J. I. 2011, ApJ, 738, 72, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/738/1/72 Werlen, A., Dorn, C., Schlichting, H. E., Grimm, S. L., & Young, E. D. 2025, ApJL, 988, L55, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adf185 Werlen, A., Young, E. D., Schlichting, H. E., Dorn, C., & Shahar, A. 2026, ApJ, 999, 178, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae434d Youdin, A. N., & Mitchell, J. L. 2010, ApJ, 721, 1113, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/721/2/1113 Young, E. D., Shahar, A., & Schlichting, H. E. 2023, Nature, 616, 306, doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-05823-0 Zhang, X. 2020, Research in Astronomy and Astrophysics, 20, 099, doi: 10.1088/1674-4527/20/7/99 Zhang, X., & Showman, A. P. 2018a, ApJ, 866, 1, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aada85 Zhang, X., & Showman, A. P. 2018b, ApJ, 866, 2, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aada7c Zhang, Z.-T., Zhong, W., Tan, X., et al. 2025a, ApJ, 984, 91, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adc56b Zhang, Z.-T., Zhong, W., Wang, W., et al. 2025b, ApJ, 995, 195, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae1962 Zhao, L. L., Kunovac, V., Brewer, J. M., et al. 2023, Nature Astronomy, 7, 366, doi: 10.1038/s41550-023-01886-1 Zhong, W., Zhang, Z.-T., Ma, B., et al. 2025a, ApJ, 984, 187, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adc68f Zhong, W., Zhang, Z.-T., Zhong, H.-S., et al. 2025b, ApJ, 978, 4, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad9473