Title: Production of White Dwarf Debris Disks from Planetary Collisions and Poynting-Robertson Drag

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2610.06780v1

Published Time: Tue, 06 Oct 2026 03:37:07 GMT

Number of Pages: 44

Markdown Content:
# Production of White Dwarf Debris Disks from Planetary Collisions and Poynting-Robertson Drag 

Fred C. Adams a,b, 1 and Konstantin Batygin caPhysics Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA 

> b

Astronomy Department, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA 

> c

Division of Geological and Planetary Sciences, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA 

ABSTRACT 

This paper explores the production of debris disks around white dwarfs, which are observed to experience frequent pollution events. In this scenario, planetary collisions occur just outside the surface of a highly evolved AGB star, after the end of its mass loss phase, as it starts its transition into a white dwarf. The collisions vaporize a fraction of the planetary material, which subsequently expands, cools, nucleates droplets, and condenses into rocky bodies with characteristic size of order s ∼ 1 cm. The rocky debris disk evolves through the action of Poynting-Robertson drag, driven by the stellar luminosity, which is initially large but steadily decreases with time. This scenario provides an alternate channel for delivering rocky material to the immediate vicinity of a white dwarf. 

1. Introduction 

A significant fraction of observed white dwarfs exhibit atmospheric pollution by heavy elements (Farihi 2016; Xu et al. 2024; Veras et al. 2024; Malamud 2026), despite the fact that metals should rapidly settle out of their atmospheres under the strong surface gravity of the star. The observed persistence of photospheric metals thus requires ongoing and/or recent accretion of external material with high metallicity. Infrared excesses, gaseous emission features, and detailed abundance measurements jointly indicate that the accreted material is predominantly rocky and broadly similar in composition to terrestrial planets. In addition to their intrinsic interest, these polluted white dwarfs and their associated debris disks provide 

> 1Corresponding author: Fred C. Adams, fca@umich.edu arXiv:2610.06780v1 [astro-ph.SR] 5 Oct 2026

– 2 – an important probe of the long-term evolution and composition of planetary systems (see also Mustill et al. 2026). The current picture of white dwarf pollution emerged through a series of theoretical and observational advances over the past two decades. Early work suggested that remnant planetary systems could survive post-main-sequence evolution and then perturb asteroids or minor planets onto star-grazing orbits after the host star becomes a white dwarf (Debes & Sigurdsson 2002; Jura 2003; Zuckerman et al. 2003; Frewen & Hansen 2014). Subsequent in-frared observations detected compact dusty disks around a growing number of polluted white dwarfs (Reach et al. 2005; Kilic et al. 2006; Jura et al. 2007; Farihi et al. 2009), although the frequency of disk detections is only ∼ 2% (see Table 1 of Farihi 2016). These disks typically show infrared excesses out to ∼ 24 μm, and are thus relatively compact, which provides im-portant observational constraints on pollution scenarios. In addition, spectroscopic studies demonstrated that the atmospheric abundances are consistent with accretion of rocky, but volatile-poor material, i.e., the composition is more like terrestrial planets than interstellar dust grains (Zuckerman et al. 2007; Klein et al. 2010; Zuckerman et al. 2010; Jura & Young 2014; Xu et al. 2019; Blouin & Xu 2022). This body of work provides compelling evidence that planetary material survives stellar evolution and continues to dynamically interact over Gyr timescales (see the reviews of Farihi 2016; Xu et al. 2024; Veras et al. 2024; Malamud 2026; Mustill et al. 2026; and references therein). In the currently favored scenario, rocky bodies orbiting at distances of order ∼ 1 AU are destabilized after stellar mass loss and are scattered into highly eccentric orbits that pass within the tidal disruption radius of the white dwarf. Numerical studies have shown that such objects are tidally disrupted into eccentric streams or rings of debris, which subsequently evolve into compact disks through collisional and radiative processes (Veras et al. 2014a, 2020). Some observed WDs have gaseous disks that are moderately eccentric (Manser et al. 2016), consistent with an origin from dynamically delivered parent bodies. Dynamical path-ways capable of driving bodies into the Roche limit of the white dwarf include planet-planet scattering, secular resonances, Lidov-Kozai forcing in binaries, and delayed instabilities trig-gered by stellar mass loss (Bonsor et al. 2011; Debes et al. 2012; Veras et al. 2014a; Hamers & Portegies Zwart 2016; Pichierri et al. 2018). Additional sources of metal-rich debris include ejecta from impacts (Veras & Kurosawa 2020) and driving asteroids to break-up conditions through radiative effects (Veras et al. 2014b, 2022). Related observations (Vanderburg et al. 2015) provide evidence for transits of comet-like bodies in some white dwarf systems. This finding demonstrates that large objects can be transported to the vicinity of the stars. The occurrence rate is highly uncertain, but could be large enough to account for the observed levels of WD pollution (Robert et al. – 3 – 2024). In addition, some objects reside in wide orbits (Vanderbosch et al. 2020), although the eccentricities are not known. Despite the substantial successes of this existing framework, several important issues remain unresolved. One difficulty concerns the efficiency and timing of material delivery into the immediate vicinity of the white dwarf. In many models, the parent bodies originate at distances comparable to or larger than several AU and must survive both giant-branch evolution and subsequent dynamical transport. Another challenge is the production of suffi-cient quantities of rocky bodies and dust. Given the observed accretion rates ˙M ≈ 10 6 − 10 10 

g s −1 (see Fig. 2 of Farihi 2016), and lifetimes of order 1 Gyr, the required mass supply falls in the range ∆ M = R ˙M dt ∼ 3×10 22 to 3 ×10 26 g, up to the mass of a dwarf planet. Finally, numerical calculations of tidal disruption often produce highly eccentric streams or collision-less rings that require additional mechanisms to circularize and generate the compact dusty disks inferred observationally. This paper constructs an alternative and potentially complementary pathway for gener-ating white dwarf debris disks (see Figure 1). Rather than beginning with the tidal disruption of distant minor bodies after inward scattering and white dwarf formation, we consider the case where rocky planets or somewhat smaller bodies collide after — or perhaps during — the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) phase itself, at orbital locations just exterior to the ex-tended stellar envelope. At this evolutionary stage, orbital expansion driven by stellar mass loss leads to dynamical instabilities among surviving planets, thereby naturally enhancing the probability of close encounters and high-velocity impacts. In particular, previous work shows that planetary systems that are stable during the main-sequence phase do not need to be close-packed in order to become unstable during the phases of mass loss (Veras et al. 2013; Mustill et al. 2018). The exact mode of instability depends on the specific dynamical architecture during mass loss (compare Pu & Wu 2015; Zink et al. 2020; and others). In any case, planetary systems often reside close to marginal stability (Laskar 1996), so that modest changes to their underlying parameters are likely to instigate instability. As a result, this paper starts with the assumption that planetary collisions occur. Collisions occurring near the surface of an AGB star have favorable parameters for producing the rocky debris of interest. The orbital velocities near the giant star (distances of a few AU) are typically ∼ 20 − 40 km/s during the AGB phase and decrease to ∼

10 − 20 km/s after mass loss. For comparison, the escape speeds for earth-like and super-earth planets fall in the range ∼ 10 − 20 km/s. As a result, both planetary collisions and ejections are expected to take place. Since about half of the white dwarfs show observational signatures of pollution, a branching ratio of ∼ 1/2 for collisions vs ejections is consistent with current data. When collisions occur, the planetary escape speeds lead to collision speeds that – 4 – t1 ≈ 10 5 yr 

> + months

t ≲ 10 6 yr 1–10 Gyr 

Fig. 1.— Schematic depiction of this paradigm for debris disk formation around white dwarfs. After stellar mass is lost during the AGB phase, planets collide and vaporize a fraction of their mass, thereby producing an expanding gas cloud in the center of mass frame, with the planetary remnants leaving the vicinity. The expanding vapor cools and nucleates liquid droplets, which condense to produce rocky debris. As the star contracts to become a white dwarf, the rocks move inward, driven by PR drag with time-dependent stellar luminosity. The end result is a debris disk that continues to supply rocky material to the white dwarf for billions of years. – 5 – readily exceed the vaporization threshold for silicate material. Impacts are thus likely, and a substantial fraction (typically f ∼ 10% – see Section 2) of the rocky material involved in the collision can be shock-heated and vaporized. The expanding vapor subsequently cools and condenses into droplets, and then solid fragments, analogous to the silicate condensates produced in other high-temperature astrophysical environments (e.g., chondules; Asphaug et al. 2011; Melosh & Vickery 1991). The characteristic size distribution of the condensed material is determined by the competition between surface tension, turbulent fragmentation, coagulation, and aerodynamic stresses in the expanding flow (e.g., see Benz et al. 2007). Once formed, the condensed droplets evolve within the complicated circumstellar envi-ronment produced after late AGB evolution. Depending on their sizes, and the timing of the events, the particles can experience outward forces due to the stellar wind and stellar radiation pressure, as well as inward torques driven by gas drag and the Poynting-Robertson (PR) effect. These interactions are highly time dependent, as the star transitions from the AGB phase to the white dwarf stage. In this picture, the white dwarf debris disk is not produced primarily by the late tidal disruption of a single asteroid, but instead represents the surviving remnants of a collisional cascade (and vaporization) initiated during the final stages of stellar evolution. The resulting rocky remnants are then transported inward due to PR drag. The collisions must take place while the luminosity of the star is still large (compared to a typical white dwarf), but after most of the stellar mass loss has occurred. One feature of this scenario is that PR drag moves the rocky remnants larger distances, driven by the large but decreasing luminosity of the star as it cools from its AGB phase to the white dwarf phase (see also Veras et al. 2015, 2022 for related work with dL ∗/dt ̸ = 0). In contrast, most previous work has considered PR drag acting in the compact debris disks that surround white dwarfs at later stages with constant (smaller) luminosity (see Rafikov 2011; Bochkarev & Rafikov 2011). For completeness, note that white dwarf surface temperatures are higher than silicate sublimation temperatures, so that the final accretion onto the star takes place while the material is in gaseous form. This scenario offers several potential advantages. First, the rocky source material natu-rally moves inward to orbital radii comparable to the eventual dimensions of observed white dwarf debris disks. Second, the impact process directly produces large quantities of small condensed solids, and thus circumvents some of the difficulties associated with converting eccentric tidal streams into dusty disks. Third, the total mass reservoir can be substantial if the collisions involve super-Earths or similarly large rocky bodies (even though only a fraction of the total mass is vaporized). Fourth, the material produced through this mecha-nism has the composition of rocky planets, consistent with observations. Moreover, because the material is processed through a high-temperature vapor phase, the resulting conden-sates may exhibit distinctive compositional or structural signatures relevant to the observed – 6 – abundances in polluted white dwarfs (Xu & Bonsor 2021). The goal of this work is to develop this scenario for producing rocky debris around white dwarfs. The paper is organized as follows. Planetary collisions and rock production are considered in Section 2. This discussion includes the energetics of planetary collisions near AGB stars, an expansion model for the resulting high-metallicity gas, the condensation of the vapor into droplets and solid fragments, and the characteristic droplet sizes produced by condensation and coagulation in the expanding flow. The dynamical evolution of the condensed solids is then considered in Section 3, which shows how drag forces due to the Poynting-Robertson effect with time dependent stellar luminosity can move rocky debris inward. The global evolution of the disk of rocky material is then considered in Section 4. The paper concludes, in Section 5, with a summary of our results and a discussion of their implications. This paper shows that planetary collisions near the surfaces of AGB stars can plausibly generate long-lived reservoirs of rocky material that evolve into debris disks around white dwarfs. 

2. Production of Liquid Silicate Droplets and Rocks from Planet Collisions 

During and after the AGB phase of stellar evolution, as the star loses mass and planets adjust their orbits accordingly, the changes in system architecture often result in chaos, instability, and planetary collisions (e.g., Debes & Sigurdsson 2002; Veras et al. 2013; Veras 2016; Mustill et al. 2018; Maldonado et al. 2020; Maldonado et al. 2021). The timing of the collisions depends on a number of factors, including the system architecture, the planet masses, and the amount of stellar mass loss (see also Veras et al. 2016). Both the collision rate and the ejection rate tend to peak just after the phase of stellar mass loss — for the standard case of steady outflow — but disruption continues over much longer time scales of 100 Myr to even 1 Gyr. However, recent work suggests that stellar outflows are episodic and asymmetric, which explains the observed WD kinematics (Fuller 2026), and which implies more rapid disruption of planetary sytems (Batygin et al. 2026; see also Section 5). This section begins with the assumption that planetary collisions occur, and argues that they result in the vaporization of a significant portion of rocky material. 2 The present discussion thus starts where the aforementioned previous work ends. The subsequent evolution of this expanding gas cloud results in the production of droplets, and then rocky condensations, as shown here. We assume that the collisions vaporize a substantial amount of mass M , which 

> 2As shown in subsequent sections, the amount of rocky material delivered to the white dwarf decreases for collisions that occur at larger WD ages.

– 7 – is expected to be roughly comparable to that of Earth. 

2.1. Collision Requirements 

The collision must be sufficiently energetic to both unbind the planets and vaporize the planetary material. These requirements can be written in the form 12M v 2col >∼ α GM 2

Rp

⇒ v2col >∼ GM Rp

, (1) and 12M v 2col >∼ M C (∆ T ) ⇒ v2col >∼ 2C(∆ T ) , (2) where C is the specific heat and (∆ T ) is the necessary temperature increment. The first constraint is that the collision speed must be comparable to the escape speed (which should be 10 to 20 km/s) in order to break apart the planet. For the second constraint, if we use 

C = 7 ×10 6 erg/g/K and (∆ T ) = Tmelt ≈ 1700 K, then one requires vcol >∼ 1 km/s for melting. Using the temperature increment (∆ T ) = Tvapor ≈ 4000 K, then one requires a minimum collision speed vcol >∼ 2 km/s for vaporization. The energy required to break apart the planet is thus significantly greater than the energy required for vaporization of the rock. Since the planets collide by falling toward each other through their gravitational poten-tial wells, the collision velocity is of order the escape speed. More specifically, working in the center of mass (CM) frame for equal mass planets, the speed at impact is given by 

v2col = 14v2esc + v2 

> ∞

, (3) where v∞ is the speed of the bodies (in the CM frame) in the absence of gravitational acceleration. This speed is determined by the trajectories of the planets in their Keplerian orbits, and is expected to be of order v∞ ∼ e v orb , where e is the eccentricity. In general, the planets do not collide head-on, but rather at an angle θ, or equivalently with non-zero impact parameter B. For equal mass planets of radius R, the impact parameter 

B = 2 R sin θ (e.g., Leinhardt & Stewart 2012). The most likely collision angle θ = π/ 4(Shoemaker 1962) corresponds to the impact parameter B = √2R. For B̸ = 0, only a fraction of the material in the colliding planets will experience an impact. Here we define 

f (b), where b = B/R , to be the fraction of the volume of the planets that experiences overlap as the two bodies pass by each other. Consider the first planet to be at rest, while the second planet passes by at impact parameter B. The second planet sweeps out a cylinder of radius 

R that is displaced from the origin by distance B. The fraction f is thus the overlap integral – 8 – between the first planet (a sphere of radius R centered at the origin) and the swept volume of the second planet (an infinite cylinder of radius R displaced from the origin by a distance 

B). The result (from numerical evaluation) is shown in Figure 2 for planetary collisions with equal and unequal masses (sizes). The picture that emerges can be described as follows: When the two planets collide with nonzero impact parameter, only part of the total volumes of the two colliding planets interact with each other. As a result, only the fraction f (b) will collide, shock, and vaporize. The remaining pieces of the planets – the top part of one and the bottom part of the other – will continue on their trajectories and leave the scene of the collision. The colliding fraction will remain at rest with net zero momentum in the CM frame. The key feature of this type of collision is that the impact has collision velocity given by the full masses of the planets. But since only a fraction of the planet mass is involved in the interaction, the remaining vaporized gas cloud will have much less self-gravity, and will not be bound. We can write down the energy budget as follows: The colliding portion of the planet has initial kinetic energy Mint v2col /2 and self-gravity −αGM 2int /R int , where the interaction mass Mint = 2 f (b)M . The energy required for vaporization is given by Evap = Mint C(∆ T )

≡ Mint v2vap , where we have defined v2vap ≡ C(∆ T )vap ∼ (1.7 km/s) 2. After the collision, conservation of energy implies that the energy E = Mint v2flow /2 remaining in the expanding gas cloud is given by 

v2flow = 14(1 − 2f [b]) v2esc + v2 

> ∞

− 2v2vap . (4) Here we have assumed that α = 1 /2 and Rint = 2 R to evaluate the self-gravity term. For the benchmark impact parameter where b = √2, the interaction fraction f (b) ≈ 0.157. The final two terms are comparable in magnitude, and (1 − 2f ) ∼ 0.7, so that the specific energy of the expanding gas cloud is large enough to produce a substantial flow velocity. For example, in the limit v∞ → 0 with f = 0 .2, vesc = 20 km/s, and vvap = 2 km/s, one finds vflow ≈ 7.2 km/s. 

2.2. Expansion of the Gaseous Cloud 

After the collision, some fraction of the mass ends up in the form of vapor with the composition of the original rock. For the sake of simplicity, we model this structure as a spherically expanding gas cloud. In addition, any remaining planetary remnants are assumed to have different velocities, so that they separate from the cloud. As it expands, the gas cloud cools, and will eventually attain an expansion speed v. As outlined above, this speed must be comparable to but smaller than both the escape speed (about 15 km/s) and the orbital – 9 – 0 0.5 1 1.5 2

Fig. 2.— Fraction of the volume of two colliding planets that experience impact. The fraction is plotted as a function of impact parameter, defined to be the distance between planet centers at the point of closest approach. The upper blue curve shows the fraction for equal sized planets. Results are also shown for cases where the smaller planet has radius 

Rsmall /R large = 0.75 (red curve) and Rsmall /R large = 0.5 (green curve). – 10 – speed (about 30 km/s), so the canonical value v ∼ 3 − 10 km/s. Just after the collision, the gas must be accelerated by P dV work up attain these speeds. Relatively soon thereafter, the gas will expand homologously, with the size and density given below. To leading order, the expansion speed is constant at later times, so that the size of the expanding gas cloud is given by 

R(t) = vt . (5) Note that the late-time expansion speed v is somewhat smaller than the flow speed estimated from equation (4), as energy is dissipated in order for the flow to reach its constant velocity state. At this epoch, the gas density takes the form 

ρg = 3M

4πR 3 = 3M

4πv 3t3 . (6) Next we consider the thermodynamics of the expansion. The gas will generally expand adiabatically, so that the first law of thermodynamics reads 

dU + P dV = 0 . (7) For an ideal gas, this expression can be written in the form 1

γ − 1

dT T + dV V = 1

γ − 1

dT T + 3 dR R = 0 , (8) which integrates to become 

T R 3( γ−1) = constant ⇒ T ∼ R−3( γ−1) . (9) So we find T ∼ R−1 for γ = 4 /3 (and T ∼ R−2 for γ = 5 /3). The interpretation is that the gas will cool rapidly as it expands, with little remaining thermal energy. The random motions of the gas will be dominated by the turbulent motions, which will take longer to dissipate. Using parameter values from the previous section, the starting temperature is 

∼ 5 − 15 times higher than the vaporization temperature, so that the cloud must expand by the same factor to become cool enough for condensation (for γ = 4 /3). This radius (roughly 

Rcool ∼ 0.001 AU) is much smaller than the Hill radius ( RH ∼ 0.1 AU; see Section 2.6). More quantitatively, the saturation vapor pressure for silicates can be written in the form log 10 

 Psat 

1 bar 



= −A − Tc

T + B log 10 

 T

1 K 



, (10) where T is the tempeature and the constants have fitted values A ≈ 30 .6757, Tc ≈ 8228 .146 K, and B ≈ 9.3974 (Zel’dovich & Raizer 1967; Melosh 1989). Condensation of droplets occurs – 11 – when the cloud expands to the point where its pressure P (T ) is equal to the saturation value 

Psat (T ). For typical parameters, this crossover occurs at temperature T = 3000 − 4000 K. After the cloud reaches this threshold, the super-cooled vapor will readily nucleate droplets, but their size (at a given time) is limited by the Weber number, as outlined below. 

2.3. Nucleation of Droplets in an Expanding Vapor Cloud 

The characteristic droplet size s is given by the competition between the surface tension 

ζs of the liquid silicate and the turbulent shearing that tends to destroy the droplet (where the surface tension ζs ≈ 300 dyne/cm; Walker & Mullins 1981). This balance is codified by the Weber number WEB , which is given by 

WEB = ρgv2g sζs

, (11) where ρg is the gas density, vg is the relative speed between the droplet and the gas (basically the turbulent velocity), and s is the size of the droplet. In the limit WEB ≫ 1, the flow stretches the fluid, and ram pressure forces destroy forming droplets. In the opposite limit 

WEB ≪ 1, surface tension dominates. One expects WEB ∼ 1, as fragmentation of larger droplets reduces their size down to this limit, and merging of smaller droplets occurs up to this limit (Hinze 1955; Villermaux 2007; Eggers & Villermaux 2008). As a result, the characteristic droplet size at at given time takes the form 

s = ζs

ρgv2g

, (12) where the density is given by equation (6). The turbulent velocity vg is expected to com-parable to the flow speed, so that vg ∼ 3 km/s. Note that the size scale of equation (12) is often called the Hinze scale. After combining the results given above, the size of the droplets produced at a given epoch becomes 

s = ζs

v2g

4πv 3t3

3M ≈ 4πζ svt 3

3M , (13) where the final approximate equality assumes that vg ∼ v (the expansion speed is comparable to the turbulent speed). Putting in canonical numbers we find 

s = 1 .3 cm 

 t

3 × 10 6sec 

3

. (14) – 12 – The droplet size, and hence the rock size, thus depends sensitively on the time (due to the rapidly decreasing gas density). The initial droplet size will be extremely small, but the characteristic size grows as the gas cloud expands. The droplets will have a distribution of sizes, determined by the competition between merging, fragmentation, and other factors. For example, simulations of giant impacts on the planet Mercury produce analogous silicate clouds from collision speeds in the range ∼ 20 −30 km/s (Benz et al. 2007). The resulting size distribution has a range s = 10 −6 − 20 cm and a peak near s ∼ 1 cm (see also Benz & Asphaug 1999). Significantly, most of the mass resides in bodies with sizes near the peak at ∼ 1 cm. This scenario requires the droplets to remain (primarily) in liquid form, so they can collide and merge. We thus consider the balance between evaporation and condensation. After the saturation threshold is reached, the cloud reaches a state where P (T ) ≈ Psat (T ) as the cloud expands and the temperature falls (Zel’dovich & Raizer 1967; Melosh 1989; see also Choksi et al. 2021). The cloud will be mix of vapor and droplets with a mass fraction fd. In this state, the droplets experience both evaporation and growth by additional condensation. The net mass flux onto a droplet of size s can be written in the form ˙mnet = 4 πs 2cm

r Am p

2πkT (P − Psat ) = 4 πs 2cm

r Am p

2πkT δpPsat , (15) where cm is a dimensionless constant of order unity, Am p is the mass of the silicate molecules, and the final equality defines the fractional difference from equilibrium δp. If the background pressue is exactly equal to the saturation value, then the net mass flux in and out of a droplet vanishes. As the cloud expands, the pressure decreases and the temperature falls. The saturation pressure Psat (T ) is a steeper function of temperature, compared to P (T ), so the cloud can enter a state where P > P sat . In this case, the droplets experience a net gain in mass. The resulting condensation releases latent heat, which increases the background temperature, but lowers the vapor density, which decreases the pressure. The net effect is to push the cloud toward the state of equality P ≈ Psat . On the other hand, if the cloud expands too rapidly (compared to equilibrium) so that P < P sat , then mass flows from the droplets back into the background, thereby producing net evaporation. This action leads to the consumption of latent heat, which decreases the temperature of the background. But since 

Psat (T ) is a steeper function then P (T ), the pressure is moved back toward the saturation value. The equilibrium is thus stable, as long as it can be maintained, which requires the net evaporation time tnet to be shorter than the expansion time. For example, for temperature 

T = 3000 K, the droplets have size s ∼ 1μm, so that the time scale becomes tnet = m/ ˙mnet ≈

(8 × 10 −5/δ p) sec. If the equilibrium conditions are met at the 1% level, then tnet ∼ 0.008 – 13 – sec, which is much shorter than the expansion time. When the temperature drops down to 

T ≈ 1800 K, where the characteristic size s ∼ 1 cm, the droplets start to solidify (and tnet 

is about 1/3 of the expansion time). As a result, the droplets can be partially solid before they finish merging. In order for the cloud to maintain P ∼ Psat as the temperature falls, the fraction of the mass in the vapor phase in the background cloud must decrease, so that droplet fraction fd

grows with time. The energy budget thus determines the final value of the droplet fraction 

fd. When integrated over the saturated path given by P (T ) ≈ Past (T ), the P dV work for a parcel of cloud material is comparable to the energy release from the latent heat of vaporization. As a result, the fraction fd is expected to reach a few tenths by the time s ∼ 1cm. 

2.4. Opacity and Optical Depth 

The opacity of the gas — and its optical depth — affect the long-term evolution of the expanding vapor cloud and can be estimated as follows. Here we assume that opacity is dominated by the nucleating droplets, as any pre-existing silicate dust is readily vaporized by the collision. Suppose that a fraction fd of the mass has condensed into droplets of size 

s (where the size distribution is considered below). The opacity of the expanding gas cloud takes the form 

κ = fd

34ρℓs , (16) where ρℓ is the density of the silicate in liquid form. The optical depth τop of the expanding gaseous sphere is then given by 

τop = κρ gR = fd

34ρℓs · 3M

4πR 2 = fd

916 πMρℓsR 2 . (17) Using the expression (13) for the droplet size s derived previously, the optical depth becomes 

τop = 27 fd

64 π2

M 2v2g

ρℓζsR5 , (18) where ζs is the surface tension of the liquid silicate. Here we are implicitly assuming that the droplets keep growing, so that at given time t, when the cloud has size R = vt , the droplets have grown to their maximum size at that epoch. The opacity and the optical depth thus decrease rather rapidly. Putting in numbers, we find 

τop ≈

 R

0.14 AU 

−5

, (19) – 14 – where we have taken the fraction fd = 0 .1. In the absence of other considerations, the cloud would thus remain optically thick until it subtends a sizable fraction of its orbit, with a corresponding time scale of about 7 × 10 6 sec ( ∼ 0.22 year). In practice, however, after the expanding gas cloud grows larger than its Hill radius, it no longer follows the assumed spherical evolution (see below). Note that the expanding cloud remains optically thick long enough (e.g., ∼ 0.2 yr) for the droplet radius to grow to s ∼ 1 cm (see equation [14]). As a result, the droplets can potentially remain embedded in an optically thick, thermally coupled cloud while they grow, and only later does the cloud become transparent enough for them to cool and freeze. This ordering is important because the merging of droplets requires the silicate to remain in liquid form. Merging would be compromised if the droplets condense into solid rock, which could bounce or fragment instead (Benz & Asphaug 1999; Leinhardt & Stewart 2012). 

2.5. Freezing Out the Growth of Droplets 

In general, we expect that the droplets will merge and grow as the gas cloud expands, because the lower density allows for ever larger sizes. This process cannot continue indef-initely, however, as the merging droplets must be able to find each other to merge. The interaction rate is set by the usual expresssion Γ = nσv i , (20) where n is the number density of droplets, σ is their effective cross section and vi is the effective speed of interaction. Next we note that nσ = κρ , and the latter quantity is already calculated. The interaction rate can then be written in the form Γ = κρv i = κρR vi

R = τop 

tvi

v . (21) The expansion rate H, akin to a Hubble-like flow, is given by 

H ≡ ˙RR = 1

t . (22) The freeze out condition, Γ = H, thus occurs when the optical depth of the cloud drops below unity (with the correction factor vi/v , which is expected to be less than unity). At this crossover point, we can solve for the characteristic droplet size to obtain 

s =

 81 256 π

1/5

f 3/5d M 1/5ζ2/5s v−4/5g ρ−3/5

> ℓ

vi

v

3/5

. (23) – 15 – Putting in numbers we find 

smax ≈ 12 cm 

 M

1M⊕

1/5  fd

0.10 

3/5  vg

3 km /s

−4/5 vi

v

3/5

. (24) Note that the result depends on fractional powers of the relevant input variables. In other words, the resulting maximum droplet size is relatively insensitive to the total mass M and the velocities v and vi.3 Keep in mind that equation (24) represents the maximum size for droplets to grow; in practice, the coagulation process will not always proceed to this maximum state, as discussed in the following section. 

2.6. Outer Boundary 

The discussion thus far has allowed the expanding gas cloud to evolve without interfer-ence from the background environment. In practice, however, the Hill radius RH provides an effective outer boundary to the expanding gas cloud, where 

RH = r

 M

3M∗

1/3

∼ 0.01 r , (25) where r ∼ 3 − 10 AU is the orbital location. When the gas cloud size R ≪ RH , it can expand without interference from the background environment. In the opposite limit where 

R ≫ RH , tidal forces, coriolis forces, and Keplerian shear act upon the expanding cloud and lead to departures from the spherical model. An approximate boundary is thus given by RH .Using the Hill radius as the outer boundary enforces a minimum gas density and a corresponding maximum droplet size 

sH = 4πζr 3

3M v 2g

M

3M∗

= 4πζr 3

9v2g M∗

≈ 0.20 cm 

 r

3 AU 

3  vg

3 km /s

−2

, (26) where the final equality uses typical parameter values. This constraint is thus slightly stronger than the requirement that the interactions between droplets freeze out. Next we note that the expanding cloud of droplets will continue to expand after the freeze-out condition has been met. The droplets will cool into rocky bodies with a char-acteristic (outward) radial velocity v ∼ 3 km/s. Since the orbit speeds at the locations of         

> 3Note that this derivation assumes that the turbulent velocity vgand the interaction velocity vido not vary with time. One can also consider a model where these speeds decay with time, where v∼1/t is a typical result. The resulting calculation produces similar results, but the fractional powers would be different.

– 16 – interest ( a = 1 – 10 AU) are vorb ∼ 15 − 30 km/s, the rocks will acquire orbits with moderate eccentricities. The rock velocities are directed radially outward from the collision point, in the rest frame of the cloud. In the center of mass frame, the rocky bodies have velocities corresponding to the orbit of the cloud center, with additional velocity vectors of magnitude 

v and random directions. These velocity perturbations thus lead to a range of eccentricities. The largest values are emax ∼ v/v orb = 0.1 – 0.2. The orbits will thus sample a range of radii centered on the star, with r ∈ [a(1 − e), a (1 + e)], or (∆ r)/a ∼ 0.1 − 0.2. 

3. Poynting-Robertson Drag 

This section considers Poynting-Robertson (PR) drag (Poynting 1904) as a means of producing a debris disk around a white dwarf during the final stages of stellar evolution, as an AGB star transitions to become a white dwarf. We assume that the collisions that produce the rocky bodies (Section 2) take place late enough that the intense mass loss phase from the AGB wind is over. More specifically, we neglect the forces produced by outflowing winds in this treatment, and consider only the effects of radiation. This treatment includes time dependent stellar luminosity, which is large at the time of the collisions and then decreases as the star transitions into a white dwarf. 

3.1. Orbital Evolution of Rocks from the PR Effect 

To start, we consider the PR effect including only the drag force itself, and not the out-ward force due to radiation pressure. This latter complication is considered in Appendix A. This present approximation scheme is thus valid for sufficiently large rocks. We also consider only circular orbits. As shown in Appendix B, nonzero eccentricity leads to correction terms of (at most) ∼ 3%, and the eccentricity decreases more rapidly than the semimajor axis. In this treatment, the magnitude of the force exerted on a rock of radius s, with cross section σ = πs 2, is given by 

FPR = L∗

4πr 2c(πs 2)vorb 

c , (27) where the corresponding torque is given by 

TPR = rF PR = L∗

4πc 2 (πs 2)Ω orb = mdJ dt = mpGM ∗r ˙r

2r . (28) Note that this formulation assumes that the rocks execute circular orbits. The mass of the – 17 – rock can be written in the form m = (4 π/ 3) ρs 3, so that the equation of motion becomes 

r dr dt = − 3L∗

8πρsc 2 . (29) The luminosity of the star decreases with time. If we start from the point of evolution when the star has maximum radius, then the luminosity is given (approximately) by the expression 

L∗(t) = L0

t0

t



, (30) where L0 ≈ 10 4L⊙ and t0 ≈ 10 4 yr. Note that this approximation captures the leading order behavior of the dimming star (Miller Bertolami 2016), but this approach is readily generalized as shown in Section 4.3. Let us define dimensionless quantities 

ξ = rr0

, τ = tt0

, and ˜s = ss0

, (31) where s0 = 1 cm. The equation of motion then takes the form 

ξdξ = −α

˜sdτ τ , where α = 3L0t0

8πρs 0c2r20

. (32) If we take ρ = 2 g cm −3 and r0 = 1 AU, then α ≈ 3.7. The equation of motion (32) can be integrated to find 

ξ20 − ξ2 

> f

=

2α

˜s



ln( τ /τ 1) , (33) where τ1 is the starting (dimensionless) time. The location of the rocks as they drift inward is then given by 

ξ = ξ0



1 −

 2α

˜sξ 20



ln( τ /τ 1)

1/2

. (34) In order for the rocks to travel all the way to ξ = 0, the following requirement must be met ˜sξ 20 = 2 α ln( τ /τ 1) ≈ 68 , (35) where the final equality assume fiducial values and a dimensionless times τ /τ 1 = 10 4 (t = 10 9

yr if the collision takes place at t = 10 5 yr). For this example, if we take ˜ s = 1, we find that rocks with size s = 1 cm will travel inward from a starting location at ∼ 8 AU in a time span of 1 Gyr. Smaller rocks will be moved more efficiently, but only rocks large enough to avoid radiation pressure will move inward (rather than outward). We thus find that if planets collide just outside the photosphere of an AGB star, from 1 to 10 AU, then PR drag – 18 – can move them inward to the vicinity of the white dwarf (see also Wyatt 2005; Veras et al. 2015). Note that the radius of the star must decrease fast enough that the inward moving rocks do not catch up to the shrinking stellar surface. This requirement is readily satisfied, as shown by the following consistency check: We need the rocks to move all the way to the center of the system over an evolutionary time t ∼ 1 − 10 Gyr, so τ ∼ 10 5 − 10 6. In addition, we expect the star to become a white dwarf, with white dwarf dimensions, over a time t ∼ 10 6 yr or τ ∼ 100. If the location ξ is outside the original radius of the AGB star at this time, then ξ > 1 at τ = 100 (where this constraint is sufficient, but not necessary). For a starting time τ1, these two constraints imply 1 + (2 α/ ˜s) ln(10 2/τ 1) <∼ ξ20 <∼ (2 α/ ˜s) ln(10 6/τ 1) . (36) For starting time τ1 = 10, for example, this constraint places the initial location of the planet collision in the range ∼ 4 − 10 AU, depending on late-time WD cooling, and where we have taken ˜ s = 1. The range of allowed locations moves outward for smaller rock sizes, and also varies with the collision time τ1.Another related effect is that the inspiralling rocks generally catch up with the shrink-ing silicate sublimation front, where they evaporate into gaseous form. Such evaporation must occur in any model involving rocky debris, as the stellar surfaces (of order 10 4 K) are above the sublimation temperatures ( ∼ 1500 − 2000 K). As shown previously, the incoming rocks reach the sublimation temperatures at radial scales of order ∼ 1R⊙ (e.g., see Section 2.5 of Veras et al. 2022). The timing and location of the evaporation depends on many factors, including the timing and location of the original collisions, the rock size, and their composition. Another complication is that the gaseous material can self-shield, so that the evaporation front moves inward (Rafikov & Garmilla 2012). In any case, the pollution of the white dwarf ultimately takes place while the silicate material is in vapor form (Rafikov 2011; Veras et al. 2022). In this work, we assume that rocks delivered to the sublimation region can eventually accrete onto the white dwarf (although future work should consider this process in greater detail). 

3.2. Constraints 

We first consider the collision rate for rocks in the disk of material just outside the star. The rate Γ is given by Γ = nσv g = Σ

mH σv g , (37) – 19 – where Σ is the surface density, σ is the cross section, and the scale height H = vg/Ω. Here the speed vg is the random (turbulent) velocity of the rocks. Using the geometric results 

σ = πs 2 and m = (4 π/ 3) ρss3, the collision rate becomes Γ = 3ΣΩ 4πρ ss (38) The migration rate from PR drag can be written in the form 

γ = 3L∗

8πρ ssc 2r2 . (39) We can define a benchmark surface density by setting the migration rate equal to the collision rate (see also Wyatt 2005). This procedure implies ΣX = L∗

2Ω c2r2 ∼ 0.0005 g cm −2 , (40) where the final approximate equality uses canonical parameter values ( L∗ = 10 4L⊙, r = 1 AU, M∗ = 1 M⊙). If the surface density is larger than this threshold, then rocks can collide before they move. This benchmark surface density Σ X implies a corresponding scale MX for the maximum mass of material that can be delivered to the white dwarf without collisions. Since the starting distances are not expected to be greater than ∼ 10 AU, this mass threshold is given by 

MX = π(10AU) 2ΣX ≈ 3.3 × 10 25 g ≈ 0.006 M⊕ , (41) which is somewhat larger than that of the asteroid belt (Krasinsky et al. 2002). This mass scale falls within the mass range inferred from observations of WD pollution, 3 ×10 22 −3×10 26 

g, but is smaller than the largest value. In general, we expect the initial mass of the debris disk to be larger than MX , so that collisions will take place. The largest bodies will collide and shatter, whereas the smallest bodies will collide and experience sticking, bouncing, erosion, abrasion, and cratering (Blum & Wurm 2008; Birnstiel 2024). In addition, radiation pressure will remove the smallest rocks, where the size threshold depends on the time of the collisions. Another issue is that the rocks emerging from the initial cloud will not adjust immediately to a disk configuration (Jackson & Wyatt 2012). The orbiting rocks tend to return to the collision point and thus experience larger densities than the above estimates. On the other hand, inelastic damping from the collisions will rapidly dissipate the random velocities of the rocks and thereby produce a thin, cold, shear-dominated disk, thereby reducing the collision rate, analogous to the case of the rings of Saturn (Cuzzi et al. 2009). 4 For example, experiments show that only about 

> 4In addition, debris disks associated with main-sequence stars show evidence that some material can survive in highly collisional disks (Sommer et al. 2025; Wyatt et al. 2025).

– 20 – 1% of the collision energy is transferred to the kinetic energy of the largest fragments, which carry the majority of the mass (Michikami et al. 2007) The rocks thus execute a cascade, starting with sizes s ∼ 1 cm and speeds v ∼ 1 km/s, which become s ∼ few mm and v ∼ 50 m/s after one round of collisions (see also Fujiwara et al. 1977; Wickham-Eade et al. 2018). Subsequent collisions reduce the speeds further, but rocks with small sizes and low speeds will no longer shatter, but can coagulate instead. These processes lead to a distribution of rock properties with characteristic size of order s ∼ 1 cm. For reference, we can derive a benchmark mass accretion rate for the limit of maximally efficient collisions. In this limit, we assume that the surface density interior to the collision radius rcol self-regulates toward Σ X (equation [40]). In this limit, collisions act efficiently to shatter the rocks until they reach blowout sizes and are expelled, while any deficit is replenished by inward drift from the reservoir (Wyatt 2005). In this saturated state, the throughput is bottlenecked at the reservoir radius, with the characteristic mass accretion rate ˙MPR = 2 πr col ΣX vPR = π GM ∗L∗(t)Ω c3 r2col 

= π√GM ∗ L∗(t)

c3√rcol 

. (42) In this approximation, the drift speeds correspond to blowout sizes ( β = 1 /2; see Appendix A) so that vPR = GM ∗/(c r col ) and Ω is evaluated at rcol . Note that this result is independent of disk mass, particle size, and and material density. The benchmark mass accretion rate ˙MPR is set by stellar parameters (and rcol ), and tracks the stellar luminosity L∗(t). In this limit, the decreasing L∗ is partially offset by decreasing rock size. This approximation breaks after the minimum rock size (set by β = 1 /2) reaches the limit of interstellar dust grains (s ∼ 0.1μm). Next we consider the optical depth of the rocky material, which is given by 

τop = nσℓ = 3Σ ℓ

4ρssH . (43) If we require that τop < 1, so that stellar photons can reach the rocks to drive the PR effect, then we obtain the constraint 3Σ ℓ < 4ρssH . (44) This constraint can be written Σ <∼ (3 g cm −2) ˜ sHℓ or Mmax <∼ 10 M⊕ , (45) where we have used standard values. The quantity H/ℓ is the essentially the ratio H/r for the rocky disk (the path length ℓ should be comparable to the radial location r), where the mass estimate uses H/ℓ = 0 .1 (see Section 2.6). In any case, for the expected masses, the – 21 – debris disk is expected to remain optically thin so that its constituent rocks are exposed to stellar photons. Another constraint arises from the requirement that the rocks produced from the plan-etary collisions do not immediately evaporate when exposed to the stellar radiation field. The sublimation radius for silicates is given by 

rsub ≈ 3.6AU 

 L∗

10 4L⊙

1/2  Tsub 

1500K 

−2

. (46) With the maximum stellar luminosity, this constraint requires the collisions to take place outside 2 − 4 AU, depending on the sublimation temperature, which depends on the type of silicate. As shown below, the preferred collision times correspond to τ ∼ 10 when the stellar luminosity is smaller, so that the sublimination radius rsub <∼ 1 AU, whereas the collision radii rcol = ξ0r0 >∼ 6 AU. 

4. Surface Density Evolution 

With the motion of individual rocks specified, the next step is to consider the evolution of the entire field of rocky bodies, as described by its surface density. We first consider the surface density evolution for rocks bodies of a single size, and then generalize the results for a distribution of sizes. 

4.1. Surface Density for a Single Rock Size 

The continuity equation for the surface density has the form 

∂Σ

∂t + 1

r∂∂r (ru Σ) = 0 , (47) where u is the radial velocity. Here we use the results from the previous section to mandate that the radial velocity is driven by PR drag and thus has the form 

u = dr dt = − 3L∗

8πρsc 2r . (48) Using the dimensionless variables variables defined through equation (31), the continuity equation becomes 

τ ∂Σ

∂τ − α

˜s

1

ξ∂Σ

∂ξ = 0 . (49) – 22 – Since the speed u depends on the size, the surface density is that for rocks of size ˜ s only, i.e., one obtains a continuity equation of this form for each value of ˜ s. Next we define a logarithmic time variable 

η = α ln( τ /τ 1) , (50) so that the evolution equation becomes 

∂Σ

∂η = 1˜sξ ∂Σ

∂ξ . (51) Along characteristics we have 

dξ dη = − 1˜sξ ⇒ X = ξ2 + 2 η/ ˜s = constant . (52) The solutions are thus of the form Σ( ξ, η ) = F (X) , (53) where the form of F is chosen to satisfy the initial conditions. At our starting time, 

t = t0, τ = 1 , η = α ln( τ /τ 1) = 0 , X = ξ2 . (54) We can thus choose F (X) to have the form 

F (X) = exp[ −(√X − ξ0)2/σ 2w] , (55) or equivalently Σ1(ξ, η ) = exp[ −(pξ2 + 2 η/ ˜s − ξ0)2/σ 2w] , (56) where Σ 1 defines the functional form for the surface density of a single rock size. The full surface density can be constructed from these building blocks, as outlined below. 

4.2. Surface Density for Distribution of Rock Sizes 

This discussion thus far has assumed that the rocks have a single size given by ˜ s, and then finds the surface density function denoted here as Σ 1. In actuality, the rocks have a distribution of sizes. We can introduce a distribution by mass, 

dm d˜s s.t.

Z ∞

> 0

dm d˜s d˜s = 1 , (57) so that the generalized expression for the surface density is given by Σ( ξ, η ) = Σ 0

Z ∞

> 0

dm d˜s d˜s exp[ −(pξ2 + 2 η/ ˜s − ξ0)2/σ 2w] , (58) – 23 – where Σ 0 is a constant that is determined by the total initial mass in rocks in the annulus of interest. Note that this form for the surface density Σ does not obey the usual continuity equation for a two dimensional surface density of a disk. The usual continuity equation assumes that the fluid has a single velocity. In this case, however, the individual contributions from each different rock size have a different inward speed. The surface density contribution for a given rock size does obey the continuity equation, by construction, but the full solution does not. The standard choice for the distribution of rock sizes by number can be written in the power-law form dn ds ∝ s−p , (59) where the distribution is determined by the condensation process of Section 2. For compari-son, the index p ∼ 3.5 for interstellar dust grains, but is generally smaller in the circumstellar environment (see the review of Birnstiel 2024). For the sake of definiteness, this work uses 

p = 3 (consistent with observations of Saturn’s rings; Cuzzi et al. 2009), which implies dm/d ˜s

= constant . Here we consider the rocks to have maximum size given by the fiducial size s0 =1 cm, so that the maximum value of ˜ s = 1. The rocks must also have a minimum size, and we denote the minimum value of ˜ s as ˜ smin . Rocks smaller than the size ˜ smin can be expelled by radiation pressure, where the value depends on the time of the collision and hence the stellar luminosity at that epoch (again see Appendix A). For the sake of definiteness, we take ˜ smin = 0 .1, corresponding to a rock size of 1mm, as expected for a starting time τ = 10, as the fiducial case. Other choices of ˜ smin can be readily considered since we have mostly analytic solutions. Notice that at later times, smaller rocks can survive as the stellar lumi-nosity decreases, and can be produced via collisions of larger rocks. As long as the mass is dominated by the larger bodies with s ∼ 1 cm, however, the results are not overly sensitive to the choice of ˜ smin .With the form of the size distribution specified, it can be normalized according to 

Z ∞

> 0

dm d˜s d˜s =

Z 1˜smin 

d˜s

1 − ˜smin 

= 1 . (60) For this choice, we can carry out the integration to find the total mass at the start of the disk’s evolution, 

M0 = 2 πr 20 Σ0

Z ∞

> 0

ξdξ 

Z 1˜smin 

d˜s

1 − ˜smin 

exp[ −(ξ − ξ0)2/σ 2w] , (61) which evaluates to the form 

M0 = 2 πr 20 Σ0ξ0σw

√π + O



e−ξ20 /σ 2w



. (62) – 24 – Since we expect σw/ξ 0 ∼ 0.1, the error term ∼ e−100 ≪ 1. 

4.3. Generalized Time Evolution 

The discussion thus far considers the time dependence of the stellar luminosity to have the form L∗(t) ∝ 1/τ . However, we can consider a general form for the time evolution where 

L∗(t) = L0f∗(τ ) . (63) The time behavior L∗ ∼ 1/t is a good model for times t = t0 → 100 t0 (recall that t0 = 10 4

yr). After ∼ 10 6 years, however, the star becomes a bonafide white dwarf and obeys a cooling law with somewhat steeper time dependence. The power-law relation 

L∗ ∝ τ −7/5 (64) provides a good starting approximation for τ > 100 (Mestel 1952). However, a number of more recent improvements to white dwarf models lead to more complicated behavior. These updates include neutrino cooling, which makes the initial phases suffer more energy loss, and crystallization, which slows down the cooling rate at ages of order ∼ 1 Gyr (Fontaine et al. 2001; Hansen & Liebert 2003; Tremblay et al. 2019). For any choice of f∗(τ ), we can re-define the time coordinate η so that it takes the form 

η = α

Z τ

f∗(τ ′)dτ ′ . (65) The differential equation (51) that describes the evolution of the surface density remains the same, and the form of the solution (from equation [56]) also remains the same. The only thing that changes is the interpretation of the meaning of the time coordinate η.Although the form of the solution is unchanged, this change of time coordinate implies that the parameter η generally has a finite range. For the choice f∗ = 1 /τ , where η =

α ln( τ /τ 1), η can become arbitrarily large as τ → ∞ . In contrast, if we use the Mestel cooling law (64) for τ > 100, then the mapping η(τ ) takes the form 

η/α = ln(100 /τ 1) + 52

"

1 −

100 

τ

2/5#

. (66) In the long time limit τ → ∞ , the parameter η is thus finite. This result – a finite value of η – arises due to the total (finite) amount of energy available to drive PR migration. For a given time evolution function f∗(τ ), the total energy – 25 – emitted by the star is given by the integral 

ET =

Z tt0

L∗(t)dt = L0t0

Z τ

> 1

f∗(τ )dτ = L0t0η/α . (67) The energy scale given by L0t0 = 4 π × 10 48 erg. The total bound state energy of a cold white dwarf, considered here to be a perfect n = 3 /2 polytrope, has the form 

EWD = −37

GM 2

> ∗

R∗

≈ 2 × 10 50 erg . (68) This energy scale is approximately the total energy store that is available to be radiated away during the entire history of cooling, from the AGB state to that of the cold white dwarf. We thus obtain 

ET = L0t0η/α ≈ EWD ≈ 10 L0t0 ⇒ ηmax ≈ 10 α < ∼ 40 . (69) The value of η is thus bounded from above via equation (69), with a working upper limit of 

ηmax ≈ 40. In practice, however, the largest value of η that can be realized will be smaller — the collisions can take place after t0 and some energy is lost before the above accounting starts. As a result, most evolutionary scenarios will have a smaller range with ηmax ∼ 20 −30. Since the total distance r0 that rocks can be transported is constrained by the amount of available radiation, so that r20 ∝ R L∗dt (Section 3.1), this upper limit on the energy implies a corresponding limit on rock transport (see also Appendix D). 

4.4. Results 

This section presents the time evolution for the surface density, the debris disk mass, and the mass accretion rate as a function of the time parameter η. Although the solutions for Σ( η), M (η), and dM/dη apply for any luminosity history, the mapping between the temporal parameter η and the physical time t depends on the white dwarf cooling law, as outlined in the previous section. We show the mass accretion rate ˙M for a representive case. For the sake of definiteness, the range of rock sizes is taken to be ˜ smin = 0 .1 ≤ ˜s ≤ 1. The evolution of the surface density is depicted in Figure 3. For this example, the colli-sion takes place at dimensionless radius ξ0 = 6 and evolves with time as shown. The initial distribution is confined to an annulus near the collision site, and the peak of the distribution moves inward with time. Note that the surface density in the inner region first increases with time (since the initial distribution is confined to an annulus in the vicinity of the colli-sion), and then later decreases with time (as the rock supply in the disk becomes depleted). – 26 – 0.01 0.1 1 10 

Fig. 3.— Surface density distributions of rocky material for a collection of time parameters from η = 0 (right) to η = 24 (bottom). The collision is assumed to take place at dimensionless radius ξ0 = 6, where the initial rock distribution has width σw = ξ0/10, as shown by the black curve. The peak of the surface density moves inward with time. The dark and light blue curves show the subsequent evolution in equal increments of η.– 27 – Surface density distributions are shown for values of η = 0 – 24, in equal increments. This lowest curve corresponds to η = 24, which is close to the maximum expected value (Section 4.3). Since we expect the collision to take place at τ1 ∼ 10, just after the AGB winds have finished removing mass from the star, final value of η could be somewhat lower ( ηmax ≈ 18 for τ1 = 10 and pure Mestel cooling). In any case, the surface density will asymptotically approach one of the later curves shown here. Notice also that the evolution proceeds more slowly for larger values of the starting radius ξ0.The mass of the debris disk is shown as a function of time in Figure 4. The fraction of the disk remaining at a given epoch depends primarily on the location of the collision, which sets the starting location for the annulus of rocky material. The figure shows the time evolution of the mass fraction for starting radii ξ0 = 4 (red), 6 (green), and 8 (blue). As shown in Appendix C, the shape of the curves depends on the composite variable h = 2 η/ξ 20 ,and the time required for half of the disk mass to be accreted is given by η1/2 ≈ 0.274 ξ20 . The debris disks thus retain a substantial fraction of their mass for billions of years, provided that the collisions take place at r ∼ 5 − 10 AU. The time parameter η generally has a finite range. Although the limiting value depends on the details of white dwarf cooling, the shaded region (right side of the figure) depicts the maximum value for pure Mestel cooling (vertical line) and the upper limit given by energy considerations (wavy curve). In this scenario, the surface density distributions decrease with time, but remain flat at small radii (see Figure 3). However, current observations detect debris disks around only a small fraction of white dwarfs, and infer a limited radial extent rd <∼ 1R⊙ (e.g., Farihi 2016). One way to understand this finding is that the disks become optically thin (the flux density 

Fν ∼ τop ). For example, for the maximum inferred disk mass ( M = 3 × 10 26 g), disk radius 

rd = 1 AU, and rock size s = 1 cm, the optical depth τop ≈ 0.16 < 1. The disk mass decreases with time (Figure 4), so that τop ≪ 1, making the disks more difficult to detect. However, the limited observed extent of white dwarf disks could arise from an actual compact physical configuration, and this truncated geometry poses a challenge for this scenario. Note that this same issue arises for the competing model of eccentric dynamical delivery, as the required debris streams are also extended beyond ∼ 1R⊙. In any case, the level of infrared excesses in these systems provides important constraints on the theoretical models. The mass accretion rate onto the central white dwarf can be written in the form ˙M = 2 πr 20 Σ0

dη dt 

 11 − ˜smin 

Z 1˜smin 

d˜s

˜s exp[ −(p2η/ ˜s − ξ0)2/σ 2w] = dM dη 

1

t0

 dη dτ 



, (70) where the sign is chosen so that mass accretion onto the star is positive. The quantity dM/dη 

can be determined for any cooling law (equivalently L∗(t) or f∗(τ )), but finding the mass accretion rate dM/dt itself requires specification of η(t). Figure 5 shows how the reduced – 28 – 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 38 40 

Fig. 4.— Mass remaining in the debris disk as a function of the temporal parameter η.The collision is assumed to take place at dimensionless radius ξ0, where the initial rock distribution has width σw = ξ0/10. Results are shown for starting locations ξ0 = 4 (red), 6 (green), and 8 (blue). The mapping of the time parameter η to physical time depends on the details of white dwarf cooling (Section 4.3). In general, η has a finite range, so that large values of η are not reached, as indicated by the shading on the right side of the figure. The limit shown at η = 26 corresponds to Mestel cooling over the full allowed range of physical time (1 ≤ τ ≤ ∞ ). If collisions occur later ( τ1 > 1), the range in η is correspondingly smaller. The darker shading (right) depicts the limit for more physical (but uncertain) white dwarf cooling evolution. – 29 – 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 26 28 30 32 34 36 

Fig. 5.— Reduced mass accretion rate dM/dη as a function of the temporal parameter η

(shown by the solid curves). The rate dM/dη shown here is normalized by the initial disk mass M0. The second set of increasing dashed curves shows the cumulative mass that is accreted as a function of η, where all of the mass is accreted in the limit η → ∞ . The collision is assumed to take place at dimensionless radius ξ0 = 4 (red), 6 (green), 8 (blue), and 10 (black). In general, η has a finite range, as depicted by the shading on the right side of the figure (see text and the caption to Figure 4). The physical mass accretion rate dM/dt 

can be obtained by multiplying by the factor dη/dt , which depends on the luminosity history of the star (e.g., see Figure 6). – 30 – 

Fig. 6.— Mass accretion rate ˙M as a function of time (in years). The accretion rate is given in units of M⊕/Gyr on the left vertical axis and in units of g/s on the right axis. (Note that 1 M⊕/Gyr = 1 .9 × 10 11 g/s.) The curves show results for different collision locations, as specified by the dimensionless radius ξ0 = 4 (red), 6 (green), 8 (blue), and 10 (black). The collision is assumed to occur at time t = 10 5 yr with starting mass M0 = 1 M⊕. The horizontal dashed line depicts the maximum observed mass accretion rate. – 31 – mass accretion rate dM/dη varies with the temporal parameter η. The accretion rate is given in units of M0, where M0 is the initial disk mass. The curves show dM/dη for varying collision locations, which set the starting point for the debris field (here ξ0 = 4, 6, 8, and 10). At early times, rocks have not yet reached the central region, so that the accretion rate is initially zero. The accretion rate then rapidly approaches a nearly constant level. This behavior continues until the peak of the surface density distribution reaches the origin. After that epoch, the accretion rates decrease rapidly with time. In order to find the mass accretion rate in physical units, we need to specify the lumi-nosity evolution of the star, which determines the mapping η(t). As a working example, we adopt the Mestel cooling law of equation (64) to determine the factor dη/dτ . For this case, the starting mass of the debris disk M0 = 1 M⊕ and the time of the collision is taken to be 

τ1 = 10 or t1 = 10 5 yr. The resulting mass accretion rate is shown in Figure 6 for different collision locations ξ0 = 4 (red), 6 (green), 8 (blue), and 10 (black). The accretion rate onto the star is zero until the smallest rocks can reach the center. After that time, the accretion rate quickly increases to its maximum and then steadily decreases. For the case ξ0 = 4, most of the disk mass is accreted before t ∼ 10 6 yr, while the stellar luminosity remains high. Since the stellar luminosity steadily decreases, for cases with larger starting radii, the debris disk lasts much longer. For ages of t = 1 – 5 Gyr, the mass accretion rate ∼ 0.001 − 0.01 

M⊕/Gyr ≈ 2 × 10 8 − 2 × 10 9 g/s, consistent with observational estimates (Farihi 2016). The mass accretion rates decrease with time according to ˙M ∼ 1/t . This result is consistent with observations, which find that mass accretion rates in WD systems decrease as power-laws (Chen et al. 2019), and recent constraints indicate a decrease by a factor of ∼ 10 for ages 1 – 8 Gyr (Blouin & Xu 2022). The solutions presented thus far are valid for a given distribution of rock sizes, where Figures 3 – 6 use dm/d ˜s = constant with ˜ smin = 0 .1. This distribution is expected for early collisions ( τ1 = 10) when smaller rocks are removed from the system by radiation pressure, but the distribution does not change with time. For comparison, we can also consider the case of much later collisions and more efficient collisional grinding. Figure 7 shows the mass accretion rates at later epochs for these cases. The upper curves correspond to three of the previous cases for starting time τ1 = 10 and ξ0 = 6 (green), 8 (blue), and 10 (black). The cyan curves show the expected mass accretion rates for collisions that take place at a later epoch t1 = 10 8 yr ( τ1 = 10 4). For later collisions, we expect the minimum rock size to be smaller (radiation pressure is less effective) and these results use ˜ smin = 0.01. The six curves in the Figure correspond to starting radii ξ0 = 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, and 16 (from left to right). As the starting radius grows, it takes longer from the mass accretion flow to develop, and the rate is smaller (because the larger rocks cannot move far enough inward in the available time). The horizontal dashed lines (magenta) delineate the range of observed (inferred) mass – 32 – accretion rates. Finally, the red curve depicts the benchmark mass accretion rate for the limit of maximally efficient collisions (equation [42]). 

5. Conclusion 

This paper develops a new scenario for the production of debris disks around white dwarfs. The basic features of the model can be summarized as follows: Mass loss during the AGB phase of stellar evolution leads to instability of planetary orbits. The planets must have semimajor axes in the approximate range a ≈ 3 − 10 AU. Tighter orbits would cause the planets to become engulfed by the star, whereas wider orbits would lead to planet scattering instead of collisions. The resulting collisions are sufficiently energetic to vaporize the planetary material. Since only a fraction of the planetary material participates in the collision and vaporizes, the self-gravity of the gas cloud is not strong enough to confine it. The resulting cloud of silicate vapor (along with other elements) expands and cools. The expanding cloud nucleates droplets of silicate material, which subsequently hardens into rocks. The size of the droplets is controlled by the Weber number and grows as long as the cloud expands. The background density of the cloud decreases with time, and thus allows for ever larger droplets to exist. Once the cloud is too diffuse, however, merging droplets cannot find each other and the size distribution freezes out. The expanding cloud then becomes optically thin, and the droplets cool into rocky bodies, with a distribution of sizes, and characteristic size s ∼ 1 cm. With their expected expansion velocities, the rocks formed in the flow attain orbital eccentricities of order e ∼ 0.1 − 0.2, and thereby spread over an annulus with width w/r = σw/ξ 0 ∼ 0.1 − 0.2. The maximum rock size is estimated to be of order 1 cm. Since the merging of droplets is efficient up to this size scale, one expects most of the mass to reside in rocks near this limit, with some mass in smaller bodies. Sufficiently small rocks are removed by radiation pressure from the star, where the size threshold depends on the time of the planetary collisions. The debris field produced by the collision starts as an annulus with radius r ∼ several 

AU and width w ∼ r/ 10. The collisions occur while the star is still much brighter than its eventual white dwarf luminosity. The luminosity that drives the PR effect is thus much larger than is usually considered and is highly time dependent. We find solutions for the orbital evolution of individual rocky bodies in this scenario (Section 3) and for the surface density of the entire debris disk (Section 4). – 33 – 

Fig. 7.— Mass accretion rate ˙M as a function of time for later epochs. The accretion rate is given in units of M⊕/Gyr on the left vertical axis and in units of g/s on the right axis. The upper curves show previous results for τ1 = 10 and different collision locations, where 

ξ0 = 6 (green), 8 (blue), and 10 (black). The cyan curves show results for collisions that take place at time t1 = 10 8 yr, with starting locations ξ0 = 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, and 16 (left to right). All cases use starting mass M0 = 1 M⊕. The horizontal dashed lines delineate the range of observed mass accretion rates. The red curve shows the benchmark mass accretion rate for the limit of maximally efficient collisions (from equation [42]); for sufficiently long times, the WD luminosity is too weak to expel even the smallest grains and the benchmark curve is depicted as dotted. – 34 – Since the luminosity of the star decreases with time, the resulting time dependence of the surface density, the mass of the debris disk, and the accretion rate all depend on the time parameter η ∼ R L∗dt (where η ∼ ln t for the fiducial case with L∗ ∝ 1/t ). In any case, these quantities are slowly varying. Moreover, the time scales required to move rocky debris from spatial scales of order several AU down to the white dwarf surface are ∼ 1 Gyr. This ‘coincidence’ — that the moving time is comparable to the age of the galactic disk — is the same ‘coincidence’ that allows us to use the white dwarf luminosity function to measure the age of the galactic components. In physical units, the mass accretion rate starts large and decreases down to values of ˙M ∼ 10 9 g/s at ages of ∼ 1 Gyr (Figure 6). The mass accretion rate can be larger for earlier collisions (or larger starting mass) and can be smaller if the collisions take place later or at larger distances from the star (or with smaller starting mass). The expected late time accretion rates are thus consistent with the observed estimates of ˙M ∼ 10 6 − 10 10 g/s. The preferred collision epoch at τ1 ∼ 10 ( t1 ∼ 10 5 yr) is expected dynamically: Smooth, isotropic mass loss drives multi-planet systems to destabilize on timescales up to ∼ 1 Gyr. However, stellar mass loss is both episodic and imperfectly isotropic. Mass ejection events produce recoil kicks with ∆ v = ( Mej /M ⋆) vesc , which accumulate to produce amplitudes (∆ v)T ∼ 0.5 km s −1 for Mej ∼ 10 −4 M⊙, the value implied by white-dwarf kinematics (Fuller 2026). These kicks act as a stochastic forcing on any surviving planetary system (Batygin et al. 2026). For planets that escape engulfment and are delivered by adiabatic expansion to the several-AU window relevant here, these kicks pump eccentricities to e ∼ few × 10 −2

and collapse mutual Hill spacings well beyond the adiabatic ( Mf /M i)1/3 reduction. These changes in architecture drive most systems to orbit-crossing within ∼ 1 Myr of white-dwarf formation, with about one third of the ensuing instabilities leading to collisions rather than ejections. A dedicated calculation will be presented elsewhere; in the present context, we note that τ1 ∼ 10–100 is generic, and that our results depend on τ1 only logarithmically. For completeness, note that the framework developed here can be expanded in a number of directions. One can consider more detailed models for the production of rocky bodies after the collision and make an improved estimate for their size distribution. After the condensa-tion of the gas cloud into rocks, we have modeled the starting state with a gaussian form, and considered the width of the annulus to be σw ∼ ξ0/10 (corresponding to initial orbital eccentricities e0 ∼ 0.1). Again, more detailed models can be constructed. In particular, multiple collisions can take place, which would lead to multiple clouds of gas and rock that evolve according to the scenario developed here. The detailed results of this scenario depend on the luminosity evolution of the star, from its AGB phase to the WD cooling phase. More detailed models (beyond that of equations [30] and [64] used here) are thus indicated. – 35 – Because observed white dwarf enrichment events are common, any viable explanation must involve physical processes that occur frequently. The scenario presented here has a number of features that are consistent with this requirement: The planets required for col-lisions are superearths – the most common type of planet. The required location for the collisions falls at several astronomical units, near the ice-line of the original disk, and where planets have the highest occurrence rate. Moreover, collisions readily produce rocky debris when they take place at non-zero impact parameter, the most common type of collisions. With these properties, the collisions result in vaporization, followed by nucleation and merg-ing of droplets, and produce rocky bodies of characteristic size s ∼ 1 cm. Bodies of this size are also produced by coagulation, and by collisions of larger rocks that are known to shatter. Moreover, they are large enough to avoid expulsion from radiation pressure, and small enough to allow for inward transport via PR drag on Gyr time scales. This scenario thus utilizes physical processes that commonly occur in post-main-sequence environments, as needed to explain the observed ubiquity of white dwarf pollution. 

Acknowledgments 

We are grateful to Valeriya Kachmar and Siyi Xu for useful discussions. We also thank the referee, Alexander Mustill, for a comprehensive review that helped improve the paper. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (grant nos. 2508843 and 2408867), the University of Michigan, the California Institute of Technology, the Leinweber Institute for Theoretical Physics (at U. Michigan), and by the David and Lucile Packard Foundation. 

A. Orbital Evolution of Rocks from the PR Effect: Radiation Pressure 

For completeness, this Appendix derives a more general description for the orbital evo-lution of rocky bodies subjected to PR drag. If we include the outward force of radiation pressure, then we must consider the two-dimensional problem. The radial equation of motion takes the form ¨r − r ˙θ2 = −GM r2 (1 − β) where β ≡ 3L∗

16 πcρGM s . (A1) Note that in general L∗ is a function of time so that β = β(t). The azimuthal equation of motion has the form dJ dt = −β GM c ˙θ , where J = r2 ˙θ . (A2) Next we consider nearly circular orbits, where this approximation requires that the time scale for the orbit to change is much longer than the orbit time (see Appendix B). As a – 36 – result, we can write 

vθ = r ˙θ =

GM (1 − β)

r

1/2

, (A3) so that the angular momentum varies according to 

dJ dt = −β GM c

pGM (1 − β)

r3/2 . (A4) In this approximation, the acceleration term in the radial equation of motion is much less than the other two terms: 

|¨r| ≪ | r ˙θ2| ∼ GM r2 (1 − β) . (A5) In this limit, the angular momentum takes the form J = pGM (1 − β)r, so that 

dJ dt = 12

pGM (1 − β) ˙r

√r − ˙β√GM r 12√1 − β . (A6) If we use this expression in the azimuthal equation of motion, we find ˙rr = ˙β

1 − β − 2GM cβr2 . (A7) To solve this equation, we first define 

f ≡ r(1 − β) , (A8) so that the equation of motion becomes 

f df dt = −2GM c β(1 − β)2 , (A9) Integrating from some starting time t0 to final time tf , we find 

f 2(tf ) − f 2(t0) = −4GM c

Z tf

> t0

dtβ (1 − β)2 . (A10) To move forward we need to specify the time dependence of the stellar luminosity and hence the time dependence of β. Following the approximations that L∗ ∼ 1/t , we can take 

β = β0/τ where τ = t/t 0 . (A11) Our solution then becomes 

f 2(tf ) − f 2(t0) = −4GM β 0t0

c

Z τf

> 1

dτ τ (1 − β0/τ )2 , (A12) – 37 – which evaluates to the form 

f 2(tf ) − f 2(t0) = −4GM β 0t0

c

ln τf − 2β0 + β20 /2 , (A13) where τf ≫ 1. Note that if the problem starts with β0 ≪ 1, then the solution reduces to the form 

r20 − r2 

> f

= 4GM β 0t0

c ln τf , (A14) as derived previously in the main text. Notice also that for this solution, the ordering of equation (A5) is in fact satisfied, i.e., the radial acceleration is small. 

B. Orbital Evolution of Rocks from the PR Effect: Nonzero Eccentricity 

The main text focuses on the case of circular orbits for the rocky debris. This appendix considers the more general case of eccentric orbits and quantifies the degree of approximation made previously. The correction to the radial motion due to nonzero eccentricity is estimated to be ∼ 3% at the start of the evolution, and decreases more rapdily than the semimajor axis. We start by defining the parameter 

μ = GM (1 − β), (B1) where β is given by equation (A1). To first order in v/c , the Poynting–Robertson acceleration (Burns et al. 1979) can be written in the form 

aPR = − βμ cr 2



2vr ˆr + vθ ˆθ



. (B2) Throughout this discussion we assume that the orbit time is much smaller than the evolution time, Porb ≪ tevol , so that β can be considered constant over one orbit. The specific orbital energy is given by 

E = v2

2 − μr , (B3) and the corresponding rate of energy loss due to PR drag becomes ˙E = v · aPR = − βμ cr 2

 2v2 

> r

+ v2

> θ

 . (B4) Next we invoke the standard Keplerian relations 

E = − μ

2a, h2 = μa (1 − e2), r = a(1 − e2)1 + e cos θ , (B5) – 38 – with the velocity fields 

vr =

r μa(1 − e2) e sin θ and vθ =

r μa(1 − e2)(1 + e cos θ). (B6) Because the evolution time is long compared to the orbital period, we perform orbit averag-ing. The increment of time is related to the angle θ according to 

dt = r2

h dθ . (B7) The orbit-averaged rate of energy dissipation and the corresponding change in semi-major axis are given by 

⟨ ˙E⟩ = − βμ 2

ca 3(1 − e2)3/2



1 + 32e2



and ⟨ ˙a⟩ = −2βμ ca 

1 + 32 e2

(1 − e2)3/2 . (B8) Note that the latter equation reduces to the circular case from equation (29) in the appro-priate limit. Moreover, the leading order correction due to nonzero eccentricity introduces a factor of (1 + 3 e2 + O[e4]). Because the starting eccentricity e0 ∼ 0.1 (see main text), the correction in only ∼ 3%. Next we consider the evolution of angular momentum and orbital eccentricity. The time rate of change of angular momentum due to PR torque is given by ˙hh = − βμ cr 2 ⇒

* ˙hh

+

= − βμ ca 2√1 − e2 , (B9) where the final expression gives the orbit-averaged quantity. The orbital angular momentum and eccentricity are related through equation (B5) so that 2 ˙hh = ˙aa − 2e ˙e

1 − e2 (B10) Solving for the eccentricity evolution, one finds 

⟨ ˙e⟩ = − 5βμ 

2ca 2

e

√1 − e2 . (B11) Next we combine the time evolution equations for semimajor axis and eccentricity to find 54

da a = de e

1 + 32 e2

1 − e2 . (B12) This equation can be integrated to obtain 

e = e0

 aa0

5/4 1 − e2

1 − e20

5/4

. (B13) The eccentricity thus decreases more rapidly than the semimajor axis, with the leading order behavior given by e ∝ a5/4.– 39 – 

C. Half-Life of the Debris Disk 

We can define the half-life of the disk to be the time required for half of the disk mass to be accreted onto the central star. This Appendix shows that for a given starting location 

ξ0, which represents where the original planetary collision occurs, the disk half-life has the form η1/2

ξ20

= constant ≈ 0.274 . (C1) The mass of the disk at any time, specified by the parameter η, is given by 

M (η) = 2 πr 20 Σ0

Z 1˜smin 

d˜s

1 − ˜smin 

Z ∞

> 0

ξdξ exp 



−

p ξ2 + 2 η/ ˜s − ξ0

2

/σ 2w



, (C2) Now we change variables to z = ξ/ξ 0, write the expression in terms of the starting mass 

M0, and use the fact that the width of the starting distribution σw = ξ0/10. The resulting expression for the mass takes the form 

M (η) = 10 M0

√π

Z 1˜smin 

d˜s

1 − ˜smin 

Z ∞

> 0

zdz exp 



−100 

p z2 + h/ ˜s − 1

2

, (C3) where we have defined a scaled time variable 

h ≡ 2η/ξ 20 . (C4) The half-life is given by the value of h such that 

Z 1˜smin 

d˜s

1 − ˜smin 

Z ∞

> 0

zdz exp 



−100 

p z2 + h/ ˜s − 1

2

=

√π

20 . (C5) The left-hand-side of the equation is a function of the variable h only (for a given value of minimum value of ˜ s, taken to be ˜ smin = 0.1 here). The resulting value of h (that satisfies the equality) is thus independent of the starting location ξ0. Numerical evaluation of the integral indicates that the required value of h ≈ 0.547, which in turn results in the scaling law of equation (C1). For completeness, one can define η90 to be the time parameter when 90% of the disk is accreted, which results in the analogous scaling law η90 ≈ 0.468 ξ20 .

D. Upper Limit on Rock Transfer from Global Energy Considerations 

As a consistency check, we can calculate the amount of energy required for a star to move a rocky body. This consideration can then be used to place an upper limit on the amount of mass that can be transferred. Although the body is falling deeper into the – 40 – gravitational potential well of the star, and doesn’t need to absorb energy to move inward, the process is driven by starlight impinging on the rock and being re-radiated (to transfer angular momentum). The energy required to drive this process is absorbed by the rock at the rate ˙E = πs 2 L∗

4πr 2 . (D1) Given the rate at which the rock moves inward, ˙r = − 3L∗

8πρsc 2r , (D2) we find the energy required to move the rock inward must obey the differential equation 

dE dr = πs 2 L∗

4πr 2

8πρsc 2r

3L∗

= 12

mc 2

r . (D3) After integrating, the energy increment needed to move a rock of mass m from starting location ri to final location rf is given by ∆E = mc 2 ln( ri/r f )2 ≈ 5mc 2 , (D4) where we have taken ri/r f ∼ 3 × 10 4 in the final approximate equality. The total mass MT

of rock that can be moved is given by the total energy radiated during the cooling phase, namely EWD , so that 

MT = 2EWD 

c2 ln( ri/r f ) ≈ 7.2M⊕ . (D5) In practice, only a fraction fγ of the stellar photons travel close enough to the orbital plane of the rocks to be intercepted. Here we assume that the height of the rocky disk is roughly comparable to its radial extent, with an aspect ratio of 1:10, so that fγ ≈ 0.1. As a result, a working upper limit for the amount of rock transfered is an order of magnitude smaller. The upper limit on the total mass becomes 

MT <∼ 2fγ EWD 

c2 ln( ri/r f ) <∼ 1M⊕ . (D6) 

REFERENCES 

Asphaug, E., Jutzi, M., & Movshovitz, N. 2011, E&PSL, 308, 369 Batygin, K., Fuller, J., & Adams, F. C. 2026, submitted to ApJ Letters – 41 – Benz, W., & Asphaug, E., 1999, Icarus, 142, 5 Benz, W., Anic, A., Horner, J., & Whitby, J. A. 2007, SSRv, 132, 189 Birnstiel, T. 2024, ARA&A, 62, 1 Blouin, S., & Xu, S. 2022, MNRAS, 510, 1059 Blum, J., & Wurm, G. 2008, ARA&A, 46, 21 Bochkarev, K. V., & Rafikov R. R. 2011, ApJ, 741, 36 Bonsor, A., Mustill, A. J., & Wyatt, M. C. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 930 Burns, J. A., Lamy, P. L., & Soter, S. 1979, Icarus, 40, 1 Chen, D.-C., Zhou, J.-L., Xie, J.-W., et al. 2019, NatAs, 3, 69 Choksi, N., Chiang, E., Connolly Jr., H. C., Gainsforth, Z., & Westphal, A. J. 2021, MNRAS, 503, 3297 Cuzzi, J., Clark, R., Filacchione, G., et al. 2009, in Ring Particle Composition and Size Distribution, ed. M. K. Dougherty, L. W. Esposito, & S. M. Krimigis (Netherlands: Springer), 459 Debes, J. H., & Sigurdsson, S. 2002, ApJ, 572, 556 Debes, J. H., Walsh, K. J., & Stark, C. 2012, ApJ, 747, 148 2 Eggers, J., & Villermaux, E. 2008, RPPh, 71, 036601 Farihi, J., Jura, M., & Zuckerman, B. 2009, ApJ, 694, 805 Farihi, J. 2016, NewAR, 71, 9 Fontaine, G., Brassard, P., & Bergeron, P. 2001, PASP, 113, 409 Frewen, S.F.N., & Hansen, B.M.S. 2014, MNRAS, 439, 2442 Fujiwara, A., Kamimoto, G., & Tsukamoto, A. 1977, Icarus, 31, 277 Fuller, J. 2026, PASP, in press, arXiv:2608.07455 Hamers, A. S., & Portegies Zwart, S. F. 2016, MNRAS, 462, L84 Hansen, B.M.S., & Liebert, J. 2003, ARA&A, 41, 465 – 42 – Hinze, J. O. 1955, AIChE J, 1, 289 Jackson, A. P., & Wyatt, M. C. 2012, MNRAS, 425, 657 Jura, M. 2003, ApJ, 584, L91 Jura, M. 2008, AJ, 135, 1785 Jura, M., Farihi, J., & Zuckerman, B. 2007, ApJ, 663, 1285 Jura, M., Farihi, J., & Zuckerman, B. 2009, AJ, 137, 3191 Jura, M., & Young, E. D. 2014, AREPS, 42, 45 Kilic, M., von Hippel, T., Leggett, S. K., & Winget, D. E. 2006, ApJ, 646, 474 Klein, B., Jura, M., Koester, D., Zuckerman, B., & Melis, C. 2010, ApJ, 709, 950 Koester, D., G¨ ansicke, B. T., & Farihi, J. 2014, A&A, 566, A34 Krasinsky, G. A., Pitjeva, E. V., Vasilyev, M. V., & Yagudina, E. I. 2002, Icarus, 158, 98 Laskar, J. 1996, CeMDA, 64, 115 Leinhardt, Z. M., & Stewart, S. T. 2012, ApJ, 745, 79 Malamud, U. 2026, Encyclopedia of Astrophysics, 1, 553 Maldonado, R. F., Villaver, E., Mustill, A. J., Chavez, M., & Bertone, E. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 1854 Maldonado, R. F., Villaver, E., Mustill, A. J., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 501, L43 Manser, C. J., G¨ ansicke, B. T., Marsh, T. R., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 455, 4467 Melosh, H. J. 1989, Impact Cratering: A geologic process (New York: Oxford Univ. Press) Melosh, H. J., & Vickery, A. M. 1991, Nature, 350, 494 Mestel, L. 1952, MNRAS, 112, 583 Michikami, T., Moriguchi, K., Hasegawa, S., & Fujiwara, A. 2007, P&SS, 55, 70 Miller Bertolami, M. M. 2016, A&A, 588, A25 Mustill, A. J., Villaver, E., Veras, D., G¨ ansicke, B. T., & Bonsor, A. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 3939 – 43 – Mustill, A. J., Pearce, T., Bannister, M., et al. 2026, submitted to SSRv, arXiv:2604.08190 Robert, A., Farihi, J., Van Eylen, V., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 533, 1756 Pichierri, G., Morbidelli, A., & Crida A. 2018, CeMDA, 130, 54 Poynting, J. H. 1904, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, 202, 525 Pu, B., & Wu, Y. 2015, ApJ, 807, 44 Rafikov, R. 2011, ApJL, 732, L3 Rafikov, R. R., & Garmilla, J. A. 2012, ApJ, 760, 123 Reach, W. T., Kuchner, M. J., von Hippel, T., et al. 2005, ApJ, 635, L161 Reach, W. T., Lisse, C., von Hippel, T., & Mullally, F. 2009, ApJ, 693, 697 Shoemaker, E. M. 1962, Physics and Astronomy of the Moon, ed. Z. Kopal (Academic Press), 283 Sommer, M., Wyatt, M. C., & Han, Y. 2025, MNRAS, 539, 439 Tremblay, P.-E., Fontaine, G., Gentile, F., et al. 2019, Nature 565, 202 Vanderbosch, Z., Hermes, J. J., Dennihy, E., et al. 2020, ApJ, 897, 171 Vanderburg, A., Johnson, J. A., Rappaport, S., et al. 2015, Nature, 526, 546 Veras, D., Mustill, A. J., Bonsor, A., & Wyatt, M. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 1686 Veras, D., Leinhardt, Z. M., Bonsor, A., & G¨ ansicke, B. T. 2014a, MNRAS, 445, 2244 Veras, D., Jacobson, S., & G¨ ansicke, B. T. 2014b, MNRAS, 445, 2794 Veras, D., Leinhardt, Z. M., Eggl, S., & G¨ ansicke, B. T. 2015, MNRAS, 451, 3453 Veras, D. 2016, RSOS, 3, 150571 Veras, D., Mustill, A., G¨ ansicke, B. T., et al. 2016, MNRAS, 458, 3942 Veras, D., Jackson, A. P., G¨ ansicke, B. T., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 492, 5561 Veras, D., & Kurosawa, K. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 442 Veras, D., Birader, Y., & Zaman, U. 2022, MNRAS, 510, 3379 – 44 – Veras, D., Mustill, A. J., & Bonsor, A. 2024, RvMG, 90, 141 Villermaux, E. 2007, AnRFM, 39, 419 Walker, D., & Mullins, O. 1981, Contributions to Mineralogy and Petrology, 76, 455 Wickham-Eade, J. E., Burchell, M. J., Price, M. C., & Harriss, K. H. 2018, Icarus, 311, 52 Wyatt, M. 2005, A&A, 433, 1007 Wyatt, M. C., Pearce, T. D., Pawellek, N. et al. 2025, PASP, 137, 1001 Xu, S., Dufour, P., Klein, B., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 242 Xu, S., & Bonsor, A. 2021, Elements, 17, 241 Xu, S., Rogers, L. K., & Blouin, S. 2024, RvMG, 90, 171 Zel’dovich, Ya. B., & Raizer, Yu. P. 1967, Physics of Shock Waves and High-temperature Hydrodynamic Phenomena (New York: Academic Press) Zink, J. K., Batygin, K., & Adams, F. C. 2020, AJ, 160, 232 Zuckerman, B., Koester, D., Reind, I. N., & H¨ unsch, M. 2003, ApJ, 671, 872 Zuckerman, B., Koester, D., Melis, C., Hansen, B. M., & Jura, M. 2007, ApJ, 671, 872 Zuckerman, B., Melis, C., Klein, B., Koester, D., & Jura, M. 2010, ApJ, 596, 477