Title: Atmospheric asymmetries in WASP-121 b revealed by rotational transits detected with JWST

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.19487v1

Published Time: Fri, 19 Jun 2026 00:13:12 GMT

Number of Pages: 33

Markdown Content:
# Atmospheric asymmetries in WASP-121 b revealed by rotational transits detected with JWST 

## Cyril Gapp 1,2* , Aur´ elien Falco 3, Thomas M. Evans-Soma 1,4 ,David K. Sing 5,6 , Shashank Dholakia 7, Vivien Parmentier 8,J´ er´ emy Leconte 9, Eva-Maria Ahrer 1, Guangwei Fu 6

> 1

Max-Planck-Institut f¨ ur Astronomie, K¨ onigstuhl 17, Heidelberg, D-69117, Germany. 

> 2

Department of Physics and Astronomy, Heidelberg University, Im Neuenheimer Feld 226, Heidelberg, D-69120, Germany. 

> 3

Universit´ e Cˆ ote d’Azur, Observatoire de la Cˆ ote d’Azur, CNRS, Bd de l’Observatoire, CS 34229, Nice, 06304, France. 

> 4

School of Science, University of Newcastle, Callaghan, NSW, Australia. 

> 5

Department of Earth & Planetary Sciences, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 

> 6

Department of Physics & Astronomy, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD, USA. 

> 7

School of Mathematics and Physics, The University of Queensland, St Lucia, QLD 4072, Australia. 

> 8

Laboratoire Lagrange, Observatoire de la Cˆ ote d’Azur, Universit´ e Cˆ ote d’Azur, Nice, 06903, France. 

> 9

Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Bordeaux, Univ. Bordeaux, All´ ee Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, Pessac, 33615, France. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): gapp@mpia.de; 

Abstract 

Close-in exoplanets are tidally locked to their host star and thus exhibit extreme atmospheric temperature gradients. It has been theorized that the fraction of star light absorbed by such planets during transit changes as a function of orbital phase as progressively hotter or colder atmospheric gas rotates into view, but this effect has not been observed so far. Here, we show that two transits of the ultra-hot Jupiter WASP-121 b, acquired with JWST/NIRSpec and NIRISS, exhibit 

1 

> arXiv:2606.19487v1 [astro-ph.EP] 17 Jun 2026 asymmetric transit light curves caused by the planet’s rotation during transit. We observe increasing CO absorption and slightly decreasing H 2O absorption in the transmission spectrum, as the planet rotates. These results are indicative of a stronger longitudinal temperature gradient across the evening than across the morning terminator, consistent with higher temperatures in the eastern half than in the western half of the dayside. The observed changes of the transmission spectrum with orbital phase are in line with the temperature increase causing thermal dissociation of H 2O, while CO remains abundant. The observation of lon-gitudinal gradients of atmospheric temperature and chemistry from the planet’s rotational transit provides a new probe for constraining atmospheric heterogene-ity using JWST beyond differences between morning and evening terminators from limb asymmetries.
> Keywords: Exoplanet atmospheric composition, Transmission spectroscopy, Infrared spectroscopy

# Main text 

One of the most extensively used observational techniques to study the atmospheres of exoplanets is transmission spectroscopy, the study of how absorption in an exoplanet’s atmosphere modifies star light transmitting through it while the planet transits in front of its host star [1]. The resulting transmission spectrum, the planet’s absorbing cross-sectional area relative to its star’s disk area as a function of wavelength, probes the planet’s atmosphere in an annulus around its limb. The longitudinal extend of this annulus around the equator (the ‘opening angle’) varies from single degrees in cold planets to tens of degrees in hot ones [2]. Since exoplanets rotate while they tran-sit, the region in their atmospheres that is being probed at any point during their transits steadily changes in longitude as the planet’s orbital phase changes. Subse-quently, their transmission spectra can change as a function of phase during transit. These changes are observable through phase-dependent changes of the planet’s absorb-ing cross-sectional area [3], which we refer to as rotational transits. Thus, measuring rotational transits would open up the possibility to constrain transiting exoplanets’ atmospheric temperatures and chemical compositions as functions of longitude [4]. Some of the hottest known exoplanets, the ultrahot Jupiters, gas giants with equi-librium temperatures exceeding ∼ 2000 K, rotate by more degrees during their transits than their opening angles [5]. Thus, the star light transmitting through the planet at the end of the transit probes a longitudinal segment of the atmosphere that does not overlap with the segment probed at the transit’s beginning. Therefore, ultrahot Jupiters are expected to exhibit strongly phase-dependent absorption signals in tran-sit, delivering leverage into studying their atmospheric temperatures and chemical composition as functions of longitude. To that end, the longitudinal structures of these planets have been studied extensively with ground-based telescopes at high spectral resolution. In the ultrahot Jupiter WASP-76 b, phase-dependent Fe absorption [6–8] has revealed the planet’s atmosphere to be asymmetric about the sub-stellar point. This asymmetry might be driven by Fe condensation in the nightside [9, 10], cloud 2condensation around the leading limb [10–12], higher temperatures in the trailing com-pared to the leading half of the planet [13] or a combination of any of these factors. In WASP-121 b, resolving the absorption signals of Na I, Fe I and H α which probe the planet’s atmosphere at different heights has enabled to vertically and longitudi-nally resolve its atmospheric flow pattern with a deep day-to-night circulation and an equatorial jet in the upper atmosphere [14]. These past achievements have been accomplished with spectroscopic observations of atoms and ions at optical wavelengths, where the absorption fraction of star light in the Earth’s atmosphere is low. Similar observations at longer, infrared wavelengths targeting molecules suffer from increased telluric absorption, leading to distortions of the signals that can cause observations to not repeat in different observing nights [15]. Thus, space-based observations in the infrared can compliment ground-based observations by revealing the longitudinal structure of molecular abundances in exo-planets from transit observations. From the ground, constraints on an exoplanet’s three-dimensional atmospheric structure are derived from measuring Doppler shifts of absorption lines driven by the planet’s rotation and winds in its atmosphere. These measurements are possible thanks to high spectral resolving powers that are not achievable in space. Therefore, measuring heterogeneity in exoplanet atmospheres using their rotations during transits observed with space telescopes requires analysis approaches that are distinct from line shift measurements from the ground. 

## Rotational light curve model 

At low spectral resolution, the Doppler shifts of spectral lines are lost, but the total fraction of star light absorbed by the planet can be measured very precisely by com-paring the flux of star light during transit to the flux observed before and after the transit. When the planet rotates during transit, the fraction of absorbed star light can change as a function of time as different atmospheric temperatures and chemical com-positions are probed [3]. The analytical form of this function is unknown and thus, we choose a polynomial approximation which represents a Taylor expansion. In the case of the ultrahot Jupiter WASP-121 b, the three-dimensional atmospheric model SPARC/MITgcm [16, 17] predicts the planet to change its apparent radius due to its rotation during transit in a way that can be approximated well by a second-order polynomial (see Methods). Thus, we restrict the Taylor expansion of the planet-to-star radius ratio as a function of time to the second order. To measure these radius changes, we developed a rotational light curve model ( Mrot ) in which the exoplanet’s radius ( Rp) relative to its host star’s radius ( R∗) is given by 

Rp/R ∗(t) = 

> 2

X

> i=0

(t − t0)iRi/R ∗, (1) where t denotes time, t0 is the time of inferior conjunction and Ri/R ∗ are the polyno-mial coefficients. In this notation, R0/R ∗ represents the planet-to-star radius ratio at 

t0, R1/R ∗ gives the planet’s linear rate of radius change relative to the star’s radius and R2/R ∗ gives the curvature of the radius variation in time. This light curve model 3is qualitatively different from past modeling approaches that adopted either a circle [18], two stacked semi-circles [19] or arbitrarily complex cross-sectional shapes param-eterized using Fourier series [20]. Since these models simulate transit light curves by displacing a time-independent planetary cross-sectional shape across the stellar disk, they neglect the changing viewing geometry of the planet during transit that changes its absorbing cross-sectional area as a function of time [3]. 

## Results 

We applied the rotational transit model to two transit observations of WASP-121 b observed with the Near Infrared Spectrograph (NIRSpec [21–23]) and the Near Infrared Imager and Slitless Spectrograph (NIRISS, [24, 25]), respectively, onboard the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). To quantify the statistical significances of the planet’s radius change during transit in these observations, we performed sta-tistical hypothesis tests on the wavelength-integrated (‘white’) light curves with a translational light curve model ( Mtra ) that prescribes a time-invariant planet radius (i.e., R1/R ∗ = R2/R ∗ = 0) as the null hypothesis and Mrot with freely-fit R1/R ∗

and R2/R ∗ as the alternative. In a Bayesian framework, we estimate the ratio of the probabilities of the alternative and the null hypothesis using the Bayes factor ( B) cal-culated by taking the ratio of the Bayesian evidence of Mrot to the Bayesian evidence of Mtra . We ran this test on two independent data reductions of each observation to verify the results against reduction-level assumptions (see Methods). Mrot is signifi-cantly preferred [26] over Mtra with ln( B) = 18 .0 and ln( B) = 24 .8, respectively, in the two NIRISS SOSS data reductions (see Extended Data Table 1) and ln( B) = 11 .7and ln( B) = 23 .7 in the two NIRSpec G395H reductions (see Extended Data Table 2). An inspection of the observations and models (see Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1) suggests that the data between contact points 2 and 3 of the transit drive the detec-tion of the planet’s rotation as the fit to the data using Mtra results in systematic linear residuals in those data that are absent when Mrot is applied. This demonstrates that the planet’s rotation leads to it appearing larger in the second than in the first half of the transit which results in asymmetric light curve shapes in both observations. These asymmetric light curves cannot be adequately fit with a time-independent tran-sit model that models the planet’s cross-section using two semi-circles with a shared center point but different radii (so-called ‘asymmetric limbs’) [23]. Thus, the signal is dominated by the star light transmitting through different longitudes in the planet as a function of time as it rotates during the transit. There is no evidence to fit for a free R2/R ∗ over setting R2/R ∗ = 0 in Mrot likely due to a degeneracy of R2/R ∗ with the host star’s limb darkening (see Extended Data Figs. 2 and 3). To examine the impact of setting R2/R ∗ = 0 in Mrot , we repeated the hypothesis test and found that the detections of WASP-121 b’s rotation-induced radius change remain significant in both observations with ln( B) = 16 .5and ln( B) = 23 .2 in the NIRISS SOSS reductions (see Extended Data Table 1) and ln( B) = 13 .6 and ln( B) = 24 .9 in the NIRSpec G395H reductions (see Extended Data Table 2). Another degeneracy between the rotation-induced radius change and the host star is driven by WASP-121 A’s gravity darkening caused by its rapid rotation: Data from the Transiting Exoplanet Survey Satellite (TESS) reveal that WASP-121 b 40.985 0.990 0.995 1.000 

> Normalized Flux

NIRISS, 0.86 - 2.80 μm

Data 

Mtra 

Mrot 

NIRSpec, 2.54 - 3.72 μm NIRSpec, 3.82 - 5.15 μm

−400 

−200 0200 400 

> Mtra  residuals [ppm]

377 .95 378 .00 378 .05 

Time [BJD T DB - 2459867] 

−400 

−200 0200 400 

> Mrot  residuals [ppm]

0.60 0.65 0.70 

Time [BJD T DB - 2459867] 

0.60 0.65 0.70 

Time [BJD T DB - 2459867] Fig. 1 WASP-121 b’s white transit light curves observed with JWST/NIRISS SOSS and JWST/NIR-Spec G395H. Both observations have been reduced with Firefly. The first row shows the raw light curves integrated over NIRISS’s first grating order and NIRSpec’s NRS1 and NRS2 detectors together with the maximum-likelihood translational ( Mtra ) and rotational ( Mrot ) models inferred from a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling of the posterior probability. Circles depict the fluxes per integration normalized by the median fluxes measured during the secondary eclipse observed before the transit and error bars depict the 1 σ intervals measured from 150,000 posteriors samples of the light curve (see Methods). Transparent cyan and yellow lines depict models calculated from 100 samples randomly drawn from the MCMC chains of Mtra and Mrot , respectively. The second and third rows show the residuals between the maximum-likelihood models and the data. Vertical gray lines mark contact points 1, 2, 3, and 4 calculated from the planet’s orbital parameters and radius [27] with gray shaded regions indicating the times of ingress and egress. 

5transits a brighter part of its host star’s disk at the end of the transit than in the beginning, also creating an asymmetric light curve (see Extended Data Fig. 4). WASP-121 A’s gravity darkening affects the NIRISS SOSS data, but is only a minor effect in the NIRSpec G395H data thanks to the latter instrument probing the transit in longer wavelengths (see Methods). Because of the degeneracy of R2/R ∗ with the host star’s limb darkening and the contamination of the NIRISS SOSS data with the star’s gravity darkening, we derive WASP-121 b’s transmission spectrum as a function of orbital phase from fits to the spectroscopic light curves of NIRSpec G395H with Mrot adopting R2/R ∗ = 0. The polynomial coefficients as functions of wavelength in those data are shown in Extended Data Fig. 5. The transmission spectra at the orbital phases at the beginning and end of the transit (see Fig. 2) firstly reveal that the fraction of star light absorbed by the planet increases as a function of time through the entire bandpass. Secondly, the CO absorption feature between 4 .3 μm and 5 .2 μm grows by ∼ 200 ppm relative to the rest of the spectrum between contact points 2 and 3. This increase of CO absorption is observed with a consistent amplitude in the NIRISS SOSS data (see Extended Data Fig. 6). And thirdly, the H 2O feature shortward of 3 .8 μm remains approximately constant, possibly shrinking slightly. Additionally, the absorption from SiO that occurs between 4 .0 μm to 4 .3 μm appears to slightly increase, though not as strongly as the CO absorption. With the narrow wavelength range of the SiO absorption feature and thus few data, however, it is challenging to draw definite conclusions. 

## Discussion 

Thermal structure of WASP-121 b 

WASP-121 b’s tide-locked rotation leads to the trailing limb probing longitudes closer to the substellar point and the leading limb probing longitudes further away from the substellar point as the transit progresses (see Fig. 2). Since both limbs’ vertical extents are primarily set by the local temperature due to thermal expansion and the thermal dissociation of molecules, the leading limb becomes smaller and the trailing limb becomes larger throughout the transit. Therefore, measuring the temporal change of the fraction of absorbed star light throughout the transit yields insight into the longitudinal temperature gradients across the morning and the evening terminators. In WASP-121 b, the fraction of absorbed star light increases throughout the whole spectrum observed with NIRSpec G395H (see Fig. 2.) This means that the longitu-dinal temperature gradient across the evening terminator that leads to an increase of the planet’s cross-sectional area in time exceeds the temperature gradient across the morning terminator that causes a decrease of the total absorbing area. This observa-tion is consistent with previous studies that suggested the eastern half of the dayside to be hotter than the western half [14, 21] and results from the SPARC/MITgcm that also predicts WASP-121 b’s atmosphere to be asymmetric about the substellar point (see Extended Data Fig. 7). 6Fig. 2 Visualization of WASP-121 b’s orbital motion and phase-dependent transmission spectrum. The transmission spectra at contact points two ( t2) and three ( t3) are shown in the lower row. The spectra were measured with NIRSpec G395H using the Firefly reduction and modeled adopting 

R2/R ∗ = 0. Circles depict medians and error bars indicate the 1 σ range of 125,000 posterior samples. The planet’s orbit and star’s radius are shown to scale, but the planet’s and its atmosphere’s size are exaggerated for visual clarity. The color map on the planet depicts an equatorial cross-section of the planet’s atmospheric temperature from the SPARC/MITgcm. The blue and magenta arrows in the zooms into the planet’s temperature map indicate the approximate heights at which the atmosphere becomes opaque. In the t3 map, dotted blue lines correspond to the heights probed at t2

to demonstrate how the trailing limb grows while the leading limb shrinks as the planet rotates. In the transmission spectra, colored regions underneath the data points indicate which molecule is the dominant absorber in each wavelength channel [23]. 

7Chemical gradients in WASP-121 b 

We propose that the changes of WASP-121 b’s transmission spectrum throughout the transit are driven by the different distributions of molecules in WASP-121 b’s atmo-sphere: H 2O thermally dissociates on the dayside [15, 28–30], leading to a higher abundance on the nightside, while CO is abundant in the entire atmosphere thanks to its stability against thermal dissociation [17]. Thus, the progressively hotter gas rotat-ing into view on the trailing limb becomes more and more depleted in H 2O, while the CO abundance remains approximately constant. Therefore, the increase of the transit depth is strong in the CO band owing to the increase in atmospheric scale height, but this effect is overwhelmed in the H 2O band due to thermal dissociation of H 2O as tem-peratures increase. The slight increase of SiO absorption as the transit progresses could indicate that SiO thermally dissociates less than H 2O, but the limited constraining power due to its narrow absorption feature makes the interpretation difficult. 

Comparison to ground-based observations 

Phase-resolved observations of the H α line in WASP-121 b obtained using the four-unit telescope (4-UT) mode of the Echelle Spectrograph for Rocky Exoplanets and Stable Spectroscopic Observations (ESPRESSO) at the Very Large Telescope (VLT) were used in a past study to trace the longitudinal variation of temperature in the upper-most part of the atmosphere where the planet’s atmosphere escapes into space [14]. These data are sensitive to very low pressures in the atmosphere on the level of micro-bars where the atmosphere is extremely hot ( T > 8000 K). The JWST observations presented here are sensitive to higher pressures than that around milibars, compliment-ing the existing temperature gradient constraints from high-resolution observations. Regarding chemical gradients in WASP-121 b, phase-resolved atmospheric retrievals [8] were carried out on ESPRESSO data obtained in its one-unit telescope (1-UT) mode [31]. The data are sensitive to atomic species such as Fe and did not reveal chemical gradients around the planet’s terminators, but abundances consistent with homogeneous distributions [8]. Since chemical gradients of atoms in exoplanets are driven by rain-out or ionization, the lack of atomic gradients is not in tension with the gradient in H 2O driven by thermal dissociation we observe with JWST. Regarding longitudinal gradients of molecular abundances, the Doppler shifts of CO and H 2O lines in WASP-121 b were previously measured as functions of orbital phase during three transits observed using the Immersion Grating Infrared Spectrom-eter (IGRINS) on the Gemini-South Telescope [15]. The data revealed CO lines to become increasingly blueshifted during the transits indicating that CO absorption predominantly originates in the trailing limb that rotates toward the observer. The blueshift of H 2O lines, in contrast, decreased as the transits progressed, revealing H 2Oabsorption to be dominated by the leading limb that rotates away from the observer [32]. These results are in line with the JWST observations presented here that also suggest CO, but not H 2O, absorption to trace the temperature increase in the trail-ing limb as the planet rotates during transit due to the thermal dissociation of H 2O. Thus, the consistency between the Gemini-South and JWST observations highlights the synergy between phase-resolved ground-based and space-based observations. 8Future work 

With the detection of WASP-121 b’s rotational transit and subsequently its phase-resolved transmission spectrum, the longitudinal gradients of temperature and chem-istry around the planet’s terminators become observable in transit at low spectral resolution. Beyond WASP-121 b, the phase-dependent transmission spectra of several other exoplanets might be measurable with JWST. We propose to use exoplan-ets’ rotations during transit, their equilibrium temperatures (delivering a proxy for their longitudinal temperature gradients), and their transmission spectroscopy met-rics (TSM [33], giving an estimate of the signal-to-noise ratio of a planet’s atmospheric features in transit) to guide the expectation for the signal amplitudes caused by rota-tional transits. Under these considerations, WASP-121 b is one of the stand-out targets (see Fig. 3). Some of the other promising targets, such as WASP-33 b, WASP-189 b and KELT-9 b, orbit rapidly-rotating A-type stars for which gravity darkening has been shown to impact the planets’ transit light curves by introducing asymmetric tran-sits [34–36]. Thus, constraints on these planets’ rotational transits will require careful modeling of the stars’ gravity darkening by combining transit light curves from differ-ent wavelength ranges as it was done in the present study using data from JWST and TESS. 0 10 20 30 40 50 

Rotation during transit [ ◦]

0100 200 300 400 500 600 700 

> TSM

HAT-P-67 b HAT-P-32 b WASP-76 b WASP-33 b WASP-121 b WASP-189 b WASP-12 b KELT-9 b TOI-2580 b Jupiter size Earth size 

500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 4000  

> Equilibrium Temperature [K]
> Fig. 3 Known transiting exoplanets’ TSMs and rotations during transit estimated assuming syn-chronous rotation and zero eccentricity. Dot colors represent equilibrium temperatures and dot sizes are proportional to planet radii. The names of some of the planets that rotate the most during tran-sit and are the most promising for atmospheric characterization using transmission spectroscopy are indicated. The data were taken from the NASA Exoplanet Archive [37].

9Methods 

## Observations and data reductions 

JWST/NIRSpec G395H observations 

The James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) observed the ultrahot Jupiter WASP-121 b starting 145 minutes before the beginning of the planet’s eclipse behind the star on October 14, 2022 (UTC), and finishing the observation 105 minutes after the end of the eclipse on October 15, 2022 (UTC). This observation was carried out as the telescope’s observing program GO 1729 (PIs: Evans-Soma, Kataria) using the Near Infrared Spectrograph (NIRSpec) with the G395H grating and naturally included the transit of the planet in front of the star between these two eclipses. The observations were conducted using NIRSpec’s SUB2048 subarray and NRSRAPID readout pattern with 42 groups per integration and were reduced using the Fast Infrared Exoplanet Fitting Lightcurve (Firefly [38–40]) and Eureka! [41] pipelines. The details of the two data reductions performed with the two different pipelines are listed in ref. [21, 22]. 

JWST/NIRISS SOSS observations 

JWST also observed a phase curve of WASP-121 b using the Near Infrared Imager and Slitless Spectrograph (NIRISS) instrument starting before a planetary eclipse on October 10, 2023 (UTC) and ending 43.85 hours later after a second eclipse event. This observation was part of observing program GTO 1201 (PI: Lafreni` ere) and used the single object slitless spectroscopy (SOSS) mode with the SUBSTRIP256 subarray with 6 groups per integration. The observations were reduced starting from the uncalibrated (uncal.fits )images using the Firefly reduction suite [38–40], which has been adapted for SOSS data [42] with further details available in ref. [42–44]. A notable recent addition is the removal of 1/f noise at the group-level stage, as described in ref. [45]. From the cosmic ray, bad pixel, 1/f-removed, background-removed 2D images, we summed the white light curve using an aperture width of 34 pixels which produced a first order white light curve which minimized the light curve scatter, found to have a standard deviation of 110 ppm and a median absolute deviation of 83 ppm as characterized by a near-flat 100 integration segment shortly before transit. We also performed a NIRISS SOSS reduction independent of the Firefly reduction using steps as outlined in ref. [46] (hereafter labeled the ‘Fu’ reduction). It starts with the uncalibrated ( uncal.fits ) files, and we used the default JWST pipeline to produce the rampfitsstep.fits . Then, we did background and 1/f subtraction using pixels in the bottom 50 percentile in flux for column median subtraction and extracted the time series two-dimensional spectra. Based on the 100 points right before transit, we measured a standard deviation of 116 ppm and a median absolute deviation of 88 ppm. 10 JWST data analysis 

We approximate the rotation-induced change of the planet’s transit radius with a second-order polynomial in time (see main text). We implemented this light curve model using the Batman package [18], in which the planet-to-star radius ratio is a constant. To calculate light curve models with time-dependent planet radii, we set up a Batman model for each data point of the time-series observation and set the planet-to-star radius ratio in the series of Batman models according to equation 1. To measure WASP-121 b’s phase-resolved transmission spectrum, we analyze a cut-out of the light curves that includes the data taken during both full eclipses and from 3.5 hours before to 3.5 hours after the transit mid-time output from both reductions of both the NIRSpec and NIRISS observations. Including the adjacent eclipses into the transit analysis is needed, because the planet’s rotation around the transit results in a variation of its emitted flux as a function of time that would contaminate the transmission spectrum if it were not separated from the systematics’ baseline [23]. The full model we use to fit the observations is 

Mrot = ( c0 + c1t) × (T (θ) + P (p0, p 1, p 2)) , (2) where ( c0 + c1t) is the stellar and instrumental baseline, T (θ) is the modified Batman model with transit parameters θ, and 

P (p0, p 1, p 2) = 

(

0 during secondary eclipse 

p0 + p1t + p2t2 else (3) is an approximation of WASP-121 b’s partial phase curve around the transit. The translational light curve model Mtra we use as a null hypothesis is identical to Mrot 

apart from prescribing R1/R ∗ = R2/R ∗ = 0. 

White light curve fits 

In JWST/NIRSpec’s G395H observing mode, the incoming radiation gets dispersed over two detectors, NRS1 and NRS2. We integrated the time-series of stellar spectra from pixel column 300 to 2042 on the NRS1 and from pixel column 5 to 2010 on the NRS2 detectors to yield wavelength-integrated light curves for both detectors. The two light curves were then fit simultaneously. For the orbital parameters shared between both light curves, we adopted an eccentricity of zero, an argument of periapsis of 90 ◦

and a period of 1.27492504 days [47] and fit for the impact parameter ( b) and semi-major axis normalized by the star’s radius ( a/R ∗). All other model parameters, the baseline coefficients c0 and c1 (Eq. 2), the partial phase curve parameters p0, p1 and p2,the transit radius coefficients ( Ri/R ∗ in Eq. 1), t0 and the limb darkening coefficients were kept different between both light curves. For the limb darkening, we adopted a quadratic law with two free parameters ( u1 and u2). The JWST/NIRISS white light curve was calculated by integrating the flux from detector column 33 to 2033 in the first grating order and fit in the same manner as the NIRSpec white light curve, but without the need to fit two independent light curves jointly. 11 We first fit the data from both instruments with a least-squares algorithm imple-mented into the lmfit package [48]. Then, we explored all fit parameters’ posterior probability distributions using the Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) package emcee [49] and estimated the models’ Bayesian evidences using the nested sampling package dynesty [50]. In both sampling approaches, we included systematic noise terms ( σsys )we added to the uncertainties of each integration ( σp,i ) in quadrature for determining the total uncertainty 

σ2tot,i = σ2 

> p,i

+ σ2sys (4) of each integration. This approach serves to fit for underestimated uncertainties in each light curve. For both sampling approaches, we adopted wide uniform priors for all model parameters (see Supplementary Table 1). In the MCMC, we use 500 walkers with 50,000 steps each of which we discard the first 20,000 steps as burn-in and thin the final samples by a factor of 100. The results of all fit parameters’ posteriors for both observations’ reductions are listed in Supplementary Tables 2, 3, 4 and 5. For the nested samplings, we used 500 live points. For model comparisons, we calculate all model fits’ Bayesian Information Criteria (BIC) from the MCMC samplings and their Bayesian evidences ( Z) from the nested samplings. To calculate the statistical significances of the rotation-induced radius change delivered by the observations, we then calculate the differences in BIC (∆BIC) and the normal logarithm of the Bayes factors (ln( B)) of Mrot relative to Mtra which suggest conclusive detections in all observations and data reductions (see Extended Data Tables 1 and 2). We also compare Mrot with free R2/R ∗ with setting R2/R ∗ = 0, thus comparing two rotational light curve models with either a quadratic or a linear polynomial for the planet-to-star radius ratio as a function of time. In the NIRISS SOSS data, the light curve modeling approach with free R2/R ∗ is slightly preferred over the model with R2/R ∗ = 0 with ln( B) = 1 .6 in the Firefly and ln( B) = 1 .5 in the Fu reduction. In the NIRSpec G395H data, setting R2/R ∗ = 0 is slightly pre-ferred over fitting for a free R2/R ∗ with ln( B) = 1 .9 in Firefly and ln( B) = 1 .2 in Eureka!. Thus, there is no indication to prefer either approach over the other [26] in all observations and data reductions. 

Spectroscopic light curves 

To investigate the change of WASP-121 b’s transmission spectrum induced by its rota-tion, we integrated the NIRSpec light curves over bins of 244 pixel columns of the NRS1 and 237 pixel columns of the NRS2 detector to generate 14 spectroscopic light curves. As in the white light curve fit, we fit these light curves simultaneously, adopt-ing the same eccentricity, argument of periapsis and period as before and fitting for b

and a/R ∗ which are shared between all light curves. All other parameters are different for all light curves. Again, we first ran a least-squares fit and sampled the parameters’ posterior distributions using an MCMC. In the MCMC, we initiated 500 walkers in a tight Gaussian ball around the least-squares solution and ran 100,000 steps for each walker, discarding the first 50,000 steps as burn-in. The final samples were thinned by a factor of 200. 12 We applied three modeling approaches to fit the spectroscopic light curves in order to estimate the model assumptions’ impacts on the inferred planet radius coefficients 

Ri/R ∗. These three approaches were 1. R2/R ∗ = 0 and wide uniform priors on the limb darkening coefficients, 2. R2/R ∗ as a free parameter and wide uniform priors on the limb darkening coefficients, and 3. R2/R ∗ as a free parameter and Gaussian priors on the limb darkening coefficients which we adopted from the exotic-LD package [51] using the ‘stagger’ grid of stellar models [52]. The MCMCs’ posteriors of the planet radius polynomial coefficients from these three modeling approaches analyzing the data from the Firefly reduction and modeling approach number one applied to the Eureka! reduction are plotted in Extended Data Fig. 5. They reveal that the R1/R ∗ coefficient, which gives the linear rate of the planet’s radius change relative to the star’s radius during transit, is indifferent toward the choice of priors for the limb darkening. This is because R1/R ∗ is the coefficient for a polynomial term that is odd about the point of conjunction. As such, a nonzero 

R1/R ∗ will induce a transit shape that is asymmetric about the point of conjunction which cannot be replicated by changing the limb darkening or the orbital parameters. When we adopt R2/R ∗ = 0 in Mrot , the measurements of R1/R ∗ again do not change (see Extended Data Fig. 5) and thus, our measurements of R1/R ∗ are robust against choices of limb darkening priors and the value of R2/R ∗.In contrast to R1/R ∗, the measurements reveal that R0/R ∗, giving the planet-to-star radius ratio at the point of conjunction, and R2/R ∗, describing the curvature of the radius function in time, are both sensitive to modeling approaches of the stel-lar limb darkening, as their uncertainties greatly increase when moving from tight Gaussian priors to uninformative uniform priors on u1 and u2. The reason for this degeneracy is that R2/R ∗ describes an even term about the point of conjunction and is correlated with R0/R ∗ (see Extended Data Fig. 2). Any even changes about the point of conjunction (such as a decrease of the radius in the first and a converse increase in the second half of the transit) has a similar effect on the light curve as the limb dark-ening that is symmetric about the center of the stellar disk. Therefore, R2/R ∗ and the correlated R0/R ∗ cannot be reliably disentangled from the limb darkening using the JWST data. 

## SPARC/MITgcm predictions 

Synthetic light curves have been generated from the output of a SPARC/MITgcm simulation of WASP-121b [16, 17], post-processed using Pytmosph3R [2, 3, 53]. The SPARC/MITgcm solves the primitive equations on a cubic-sphere grid. In the simu-lation, the pressure ranges from 200 bar to 2 μbar over 53 levels, with a horizontal resolution equivalent to 128 longitudes and 64 latitudes. The model includes optical absorbers such as TiO and VO, assumes a solar metallicity and C/O ratio and does not include clouds. As an indication, the temperature on the dayside is ∼ 2800 K. Pytmosph3R is an open-source Python package that provides tools to compute synthetic observations, transmission and emission spectroscopy, transit light curves 13 and phase curves, from three-dimension atmospheric models such as GCMs. Its inputs are the planetary, stellar and orbital characteristics, along with the temperature map provided by the GCM, and the abundances of species present in the atmosphere. It computes absorption, Rayleigh and Mie scattering along with continuum absorption (Collision Induced Absorption, CIA) along a set of light rays passing through the atmosphere. The species included are He, H 2, H, H 2O, CO, TiO, VO, Na, K, SiO, for which we account for the absorption opacity (except for He, H 2 and H) and the continuum includes H 2-H 2 and H 2-He. Opacities have been downloaded from Exomol [54]. The orbital period has been set to 1.274925 days, with an orbital radius of 0.025 au, a planet radius of 1.61 Jupiter radii, with a surface gravity of 8.436 m s −2.To compare the simulation results with the observations, we generated light curves for WASP-121 b in NIRSpec G395H’s wavelength range with the star’s limb darkening set to zero. That way, the depth of the model light curve during the full transit (between contact points 2 and 3) can be converted into the planetary-to-stellar radius ratio using 

Rp/R ∗(t) = p1 − F (t), (5) where F (t) is the model light curve’s flux. To facilitate the comparison between model light curves and the observations of Rp/R ∗(t) approximated as a polynomial (see Eq. 1), we fit quadratic polynomials to the model Rp/R ∗(t) of each spectral channel to infer the model predictions for R0/R ∗, R1/R ∗ and R2/R ∗ as functions of wavelength (examples for this approximation are shown in Extended Data Fig. 3). All relative deviations of the fit polynomials to the GCM’s Rp/R ∗(t) are smaller than 0 .1 % in all simulated time steps and thus, the approximation as quadratic functions for the comparison to the observations is justified. Like the observations, the SPARC/MITgcm shows positive R1/R ∗ for most and negative R1/R ∗ with much smaller absolute values for some spectroscopic channels (see Extended Data Fig. 5); however, it systematically underestimates the values for 

R1/R ∗ over the entire wavelength range. One limitation that could contribute to the model’s underestimation of R1/R ∗ is the lack of clouds in the atmosphere that might be present around the morning terminator. Additionally, a previous phase curve anal-ysis of WASP-121 b showed that the SPARC/MITgcm delivers too high nightside temperatures compared to the measurements [21]. With an overestimated nightside temperature, the model underestimates the day- to nightside temperature contrast, leading to underestimated longitudinal temperature gradients across the terminators in line with the observed discrepancy to the observations. Another reason for the mismatch between the observations and the model could be an inaccurate atmo-spheric chemical composition in the model due to the assumed Solar metallicity and C/O = 0 .55, since recent observations have consistently shown that WASP-121 b’s C/O is much higher than 0.55 [22, 29, 30]. These differences in chemistry might also be responsible for the deviations of the model’s transmission spectrum at the point of conjunction from the observations (Fig. 5, blue diamonds in the upper panel), namely, the too steep H 2O feature and the underestimation of the CO feature between 4 .3 μmand 5 .2 μm. To simulate the effect of a colder morning terminator, we modified the ‘nominal’ SPARC/MITgcm by setting the vertical temperature structure from 240 ◦ to 302 ◦ in 14 longitude to its structure at 240 ◦ (see Extended Data Fig. 7). With this modified temperature field (labeled the ‘muted leading limb’ model in Extended Data Fig. 5), the model predictions for R1/R ∗ increase in all wavelengths, because the planet’s rotation does not lead to a shrinking of the leading limb anymore due to a vertical temperature structure that is constant in longitude. With this modification, the model predictions for R1/R ∗ are larger than the observations between 3 .05 μm and 4 .0 μmwhere H 2O is the dominant molecular absorber [23]. At wavelengths larger than 4 .3 μmwhere CO is the strongest absorbing molecule [23], the model values for R1/R ∗ are smaller than the data (see Extended Data Fig. 5), though the lower limits of four of the five data points’ 1 σ intervals overlap with the model predictions. Thus, the order of magnitude of the transit asymmetry observed with NIRSpec G395H NRS2 can be reproduced by the longitudinal temperature gradient around the evening terminator in the SPARC/MITgcm, when the longitudinal temperature gradient around the morning terminator is muted. The SPARC/MITgcm predicts negative R2/R ∗ through the whole spectrum, sug-gesting a local maximum of the planet’s cross-sectional area during transit. When adopting Gaussian priors on the limb darkening in the light curve analysis, we find con-sistently positive R2/R ∗ (see Extended Data Fig. 5), implying a local radius minimum during transit. The SPARC/MITgcm does not include any tidal deformation of the planet and thus the local maximum during transit in the model is solely caused by the atmospheric structure. The tidal deformation of WASP-121 b would lead to an elon-gation of the planet along the planet-star axis [55] which, together with the planet’s rotation, would cause a local minimum of its cross-sectional area during transit [3]. Thus, the observed tendency to positive R2/R ∗ might be a hint at the planet’s tidal deformation. Measuring the planet’s tidal deformation from this observation would be dependent on the assumption that the adopted limb darkening priors are accurate. However, their degree of precision is unknown and thus, we refrain from attempting to constrain WASP-121 b’s tidal Love number that quantifies its tidal deformation. 

## Other sources of asymmetric transits 

A phase-dependent transmission spectrum of WASP-121 b is not the only possible cause of asymmetric transit light curves. Thus, we examine the plausibility of the observed transit asymmetries originating in the observing instruments or the planet’s host star WASP-121 A. 

Instrumental systematics 

Instrumental systematics causing the observed asymmetric light curve shapes would require an instrumental effect that impacts the NIRISS SOSS and NIRSpec G395H’s NRS2 data that show a transit asymmetry, but not NIRSpec G395H’s NRS1 observa-tions that deliver a symmetric transit light curve (see Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1). Considering that past observations suggested the NRS2 detector to be less affected by instrumental systematics than NRS1 (see, e.g., ref. [21, 56, 57]) and the coinci-dence of systematics required during the precise time span of the transit to create the observed signal in both the NIRISS SOSS and the NIRSpec G395H observations, such 15 a scenario appears unlikely. Therefore, the transit asymmetry is likely a signal from either WASP-121 b or its host star. 

Stellar activity and gravity darkening 

In NIRSpec’s wavelength range, the observed transit asymmetry is more pronounced in the longer than in the shorter observed wavelengths. This is the opposite of how tran-sit asymmetries caused by temperature inhomogeneities on the star’s surface driven by, e.g., star spots or faculae would change with wavelength [58, 59]. Additionally, as an F6-type star [60], WASP-121 A is expected to display less activity-driven flux vari-ations throughout its surface that could induce asymmetric transit light curves than later stellar types [61]. Indeed, previous transit observations in the optical have not revealed any hints for photometric contamination caused by stellar activity [62], mak-ing stellar activity as the cause of the observed transit asymmetries yet more unlikely. As an early spectral type, however, WASP-121 A might be a fast rotator, leading to gravity darkening of its equator relative to the poles due to the reduction of the equa-tor’s surface gravity caused by centrifugal forces and an oblate shape of the star [63]. Together with the misalignment of WASP-121 b’s orbital axis with the star’s rotation axis [47, 60], this system configuration can induce a transit asymmetry [64]. From the nearly pole-on inclination of WASP-121 A [47], we estimate the rotation rate of the star to be between 0 .15 − 0.28 as a fraction of the critical rotational velocity. As such, gravity darkening of the host star should be a significant effect, causing a difference in emission intensity between the equator and pole of 6 .4 − 20 .8% in the optical and 2 − 6% in the JWST/NIRSpec passband. To quantify the possible impact of gravity darkening on our observations, we analyzed all available observations of WASP-121 b observed with TESS due to the proportionally higher contribution of gravity darkening to the transit asymmetry in the optical. We query 5 sectors of 20 s cadence light curves and 1 sector of 120 s cadence, including only data ∼

0.25 days around the center of each transit. To model the transit of a rapidly-rotating, gravity-darkened star, we use the method described in ref. [34], but instead rewrite the spherical-harmonic decomposition of the gravity-darkened surface using Planck’s blackbody law into JAX. This allows us to use eclipsoid [65] as the model within the JAX ecosystem. We use NumPyro [66] to construct a probabilistic model for the gravity-darkened transit, using priors from ref. [21] for the stellar and planet parameters and ref. [47] for the projected orbital obliquity. We also sample in the sine of stellar inclination as an isotropic prior on the spin axis, restricted to the range 0-0.25 to ensure the star is relatively pole-on, as suggested by ref. [47], and place a uniform prior on the dimensionless stellar rotation rate ω between 0-0.3. We fix the gravity-darkening exponent β that governs what temperature difference a difference in surface gravity between the star’s equator and pole results in to 0.23 as varying it can cause it to run off towards physically unrealistic values [67]. Finally, we use Hamiltonian Monte Carlo with the NUTS sampler [68] in order to obtain posteriors on the parameters of interest. We also performed inference using the same priors but without the gravity-darkening map on the star as a comparison to a standard transit fit to examine the amplitude of a transit asymmetry the star’s gravity darkening induces. 16 TESS’s light curves confirm that WASP-121 A is measurably gravity-darkened, creating a transit asymmetry with an amplitude on the order of 100 ppm in the optical light curves between contact points 2 and 3 as well as upward residuals reaching up to ∼ 300 ppm during egress (see Extended Data Fig. 4). The posteriors of the planet’s and star’s inclination as well as the projected and true spin-orbit angles (see Supplementary Table 6) are consistent with previous radial-velocity observations of the system [47]. For the stellar rotation rate, we find (12 .6 ± 0.19) % times the critical rotational velocity which is slightly lower than the (15 −28) % estimated before [47] and thus suggests that the star’s rotation rate lies on the lower end of previous constraints. One possible reason for the small discrepancy between our result and the radial-velocity observation’s lower limit might be the star’s gravity-darkening exponent we fixed at β = 0 .23. β can be lower than the value of β = 0 .25 predicted theoretically [69], reducing the temperature contrast between stellar equator and pole for a given rotation rate. Thus, if WASP-121 A’s β were lesser than 0 .23, our measured ω would be biased to smaller values which would be in line with our measurement being slightly lower than the Doppler tomography’s lower limit. Since the wavelength bands of TESS and JWST/NIRISS SOSS Order 1 overlap, the NIRISS SOSS light curve will also be affected by gravity darkening. Indeed, both the asymmetry between contact points 2 and 3 and the yet stronger upward residuals during egress caused by gravity darkening in TESS (see Extended Data Fig. 4) are clearly visible in the white light curve of NIRISS SOSS Order 1 (see middle rows of Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1). To examine, if the transit asymmetry observed with JWST/NIRSpec G395H’s NRS2 is consistent with WASP-121 A’s gravity darkening observed with TESS, we fit the JWST/NIRSpec G395H NRS2 data in the same manner as before, but with a maximum a-posteriors method. The stellar rotation rate required to fit the NRS2 light curve is ω = 19 .8 % (see Supplementary Table 6) and thus, deviates from the TESS result by > 30 σ. This demonstrates that gravity darkening of WASP-121 A is not sufficient for explaining the transit asymmetry observed with JWST/NIRSpec. Additionally, the gravity darkening model does not offer an explanation for the lack of a transit asymmetry in NRS1, if NRS2 were affected by gravity darkening as the tran-sit asymmetry driven by gravity darkening would monotonically decreases as longer wavelengths are observed [64]. Therefore, in NRS2, gravity darkening must be a minor effect compared to WASP-121 b’s phase-dependent transmission spectrum as the sym-metric NRS1 light curve demonstrates that gravity darkening has already dropped below a measurable level at that wavelength range (see Fig. 1 and Extended Data Fig. 1). 

## Phase-dependent CO absorption 

JWST/NIRISS’s and JWST/NIRSpec G395H’s bandpasses include one CO band each. To examine, if WASP-121 b’s radius change is consistent between both observed CO bands, we integrated both detectors’ light curves over the heads of the two CO bands and fit both Mtra and Mrot with R2/R ∗ = 0 using least-squares approaches and MCMCs as before to the light curves. In these fits, the orbital parameters were fixed to the two observations’ white light curve fit results. The fits to the observations 17 (see Extended Data Fig. 6) reveal that WASP-121 b’s rotation-induced radius change results in residuals on the order of 250 ppm between contact points 2 and 3 when Mtra 

is used in both the NIRISS and NIRSpec light curve, though the NIRISS data suffer from a lower signal-to-noise ratio due to the probed CO band being narrower than the one in NIRSpec. The MCMC posteriors of R1/R ∗ are 650 +188  

> −189

ppm hr −1 in NIRISS and 580 +90  

> −91

ppm hr −1 in NIRSpec and thus consistent between both observations. The slightly stronger increase of WASP-121 b’s apparent radius as a function of time in NIRISS compared to NIRSpec might be the result of contamination with grav-ity darkening. We note, however, that the linear rate of radius change in the white light curve of NIRISS (409 +53  

> −53

ppm hr −1, see Supplementary Table 4) is smaller than the rate measured from the light curve integrated over the CO band (650 +188  

> −189

ppm hr −1). Gravity darkening monotonically decreases with wavelength and since the CO band in NIRISS is located on the long-wavelength end of the detector, there has to be an additional source of an asymmetric light curve that elevates the R1/R ∗ measurement over that from the white light curve. Thus, both the NIRISS and the NIRSpec data point toward increasing CO absorption in the planet as a function of orbital phase with quantitatively consistent amplitudes. This demonstrates JWST’s remarkable capa-bility to measure phase-dependent absorption in transiting exoplanets consistently between different observations and instruments. 

# Data availability 

The JWST and TESS data used in this study are publicly available on the Barbara A. Mikulski Archive for Space Telescopes at https://mast.stsci.edu. The JWST/NIRSpec observation analyzed here is part of JWST observing program G.O. 1729 (P.I.: T.M.E.-S.; co-P.I.: Tiffany Kataria) and can be retrieved from ref. [70]. The JWST/NIRISS observation is associated with JWST observing program G.T.O. 1201 (P.I.: David Lafreni` ere) and can be retrieved from ref. [71]. 

# Code availability 

The following software packages were used to perform the data analysis and model interpretation: astropy [72–74], batman [18], corner [75], dynesty [50], eclipsoid [65], emcee [49], Eureka! [41], ExoTIC-LD [51], FIREFly [38–40], lmfit [48], matplotlib [76], numpy [77], NumPyro [66], pandas [78], scipy [79] 

# Acknowledgements 

This work is based on observations made with the NASA/ESA/CSA James Webb Space Telescope. The data were obtained from the Mikulski Archive for Space Tele-scopes at the Space Telescope Science Institute, which is operated by the Association of Universities for Research in Astronomy, Inc., under NASA contract NAS 5-03127 for JWST. 18 This research has made use of the NASA Exoplanet Archive, which is operated by the California Institute of Technology, under contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration under the Exoplanet Exploration Program. 

# Author contributions 

C.G. analyzed the JWST data and wrote the manuscript with assistance from A.F, T.M.E.-S., D.K.S, S.D. and E.-M.A. A.F. provided model light curves derived from the SPARC/MITgcm using Pytmosph3R. T.M.E.-S., V.P. and J.L. supported the interpretation of the results. D.K.S and E.-M.A. reduced the JWST/NIRSpec obser-vations. D.K.S and G.F. reduced the JWST/NIRISS observations. S.D. analyzed the TESS data and the JWST/NIRSpec NRS2 data with a gravity darkening model. 

# Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 

# Materials and correspondence 

Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Cyril Gapp. 

# References 

[1] Seager, S. & Sasselov, D. D. Theoretical Transmission Spectra during Extrasolar Giant Planet Transits. Astrophys. J. 537 , 916–921 (2000). [2] Caldas, A. et al. Effects of a fully 3D atmospheric structure on exoplanet trans-mission spectra: retrieval biases due to day-night temperature gradients. Astron. Astrophys. 623 , A161 (2019). [3] Falco, A., Leconte, J., Mechineau, A. & Pluriel, W. Signature of the atmospheric asymmetries of hot and ultra-hot Jupiters in light curvest. Astron. Astrophys. 

685 , A125 (2024). [4] Burrows, A., Rauscher, E., Spiegel, D. S. & Menou, K. Photometric and Spec-tral Signatures of Three-dimensional Models of Transiting Giant Exoplanets. 

Astrophys. J. Lett. 719 , 341–350 (2010). [5] Wardenier, J. P., Parmentier, V. & Lee, E. K. H. All along the line of sight: a closer look at opening angles and absorption regions in the atmospheres of transiting exoplanets. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 510 , 620–629 (2022). [6] Ehrenreich, D. et al. Nightside condensation of iron in an ultrahot giant exoplanet. 

Nature 580 , 597–601 (2020). [7] Kesseli, A. Y. & Snellen, I. A. G. Confirmation of Asymmetric Iron Absorption in WASP-76b with HARPS. Astrophys. J. Lett. 908 , L17 (2021). 19 [8] Gandhi, S. et al. Retrieval Survey of Metals in Six Ultrahot Jupiters: Trends in Chemistry, Rain-out, Ionization, and Atmospheric Dynamics. Astron. J. 165 ,242 (2023). [9] Kesseli, A. Y., Snellen, I. A. G., Casasayas-Barris, N., Molli` ere, P. & S´ anchez-L´ opez, A. An Atomic Spectral Survey of WASP-76b: Resolving Chemical Gradients and Asymmetries. Astrophys. J. 163 , 107 (2022). [10] Gandhi, S. et al. Spatially resolving the terminator: variation of Fe, temperature, and winds in WASP-76 b across planetary limbs and orbital phase. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 515 , 749–766 (2022). [11] Savel, A. B. et al. No Umbrella Needed: Confronting the Hypothesis of Iron Rain on WASP-76b with Post-processed General Circulation Models. Astrophys. J. 

926 , 85 (2022). [12] Maguire, C. et al. High resolution atmospheric retrievals of WASP-76b transmis-sion spectroscopy with ESPRESSO: Monitoring limb asymmetries across multiple transits. Astron. Astrophys. 687 , A49 (2024). [13] Wardenier, J. P., Parmentier, V., Lee, E. K. H., Line, M. R. & Gharib-Nezhad, E. Decomposing the iron cross-correlation signal of the ultra-hot Jupiter WASP-76b in transmission using 3D Monte Carlo radiative transfer. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 506 , 1258–1283 (2021). [14] Seidel, J. V. et al. Vertical structure of an exoplanet’s atmospheric jet stream. 

Nature 639 , 902–908 (2025). [15] Wardenier, J. P. et al. Phase-resolving the Absorption Signatures of Water and Carbon Monoxide in the Atmosphere of the Ultra-hot Jupiter WASP-121b with GEMINI-S/IGRINS. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 136 , 084403 (2024). [16] Showman, A. P. et al. Atmospheric Circulation of Hot Jupiters: Coupled Radiative-Dynamical General Circulation Model Simulations of HD 189733b and HD 209458b. Astrophys. J. 699 , 564–584 (2009). [17] Parmentier, V. et al. From thermal dissociation to condensation in the atmo-spheres of ultra hot Jupiters: WASP-121b in context. Astron. Astrophys. 617 ,A110 (2018). [18] Kreidberg, L. batman: BAsic Transit Model cAlculatioN in Python. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 127 , 1161 (2015). [19] Espinoza, N. & Jones, K. Constraining Mornings and Evenings on Distant Worlds: A new Semianalytical Approach and Prospects with Transmission Spectroscopy. 

Astron. J. 162 , 165 (2021). 20 [20] Grant, D. & Wakeford, H. R. Transmission strings: a technique for spatially mapping exoplanet atmospheres around their terminators. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 519 , 5114–5127 (2023). [21] Mikal-Evans, T. et al. A JWST NIRSpec Phase Curve for WASP-121b: Dayside Emission Strongest Eastward of the Substellar Point and Nightside Conditions Conducive to Cloud Formation. Astrophys. J. Lett. 943 , L17 (2023). [22] Evans-Soma, T. M. et al. SiO and a super-stellar C/O ratio in the atmosphere of the giant exoplanet WASP-121 b. Nat. Astron. 9, 845–861 (2025). [23] Gapp, C. et al. WASP-121 b’s Transmission Spectrum Observed with JWST/NIRSpec G395H Reveals Thermal Dissociation and SiO in the Atmo-sphere. Astron. J. 169 , 341 (2025). [24] Splinter, J. et al. Precise Constraints on the Energy Budget of WASP-121 b from Its JWST NIRISS/SOSS Phase Curve. Astron. J. 170 , 323 (2025). [25] Allart, R. et al. A complex structure of escaping helium spanning more than half the orbit of the ultra-hot Jupiter WASP-121 b. Nat. Commun. 16 , 10822 (2025). [26] Thorngren, D. P., Sing, D. K. & Mukherjee, S. Bayesian Model Comparison and Significance: Widespread Errors and How to Correct Them. Astrophys. J. Suppl. Ser. 283 , 10 (2026). [27] Winn, J. N. in Exoplanet Transits and Occultations (ed.Seager, S.) Exoplanets 

55–77 (University of Arizona Press, Tucson, AZ, USA, 2010). [28] Mikal-Evans, T. et al. Confirmation of water emission in the dayside spectrum of the ultrahot Jupiter WASP-121b. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 496 , 1638–1644 (2020). [29] Smith, P. C. B. et al. The Roasting Marshmallows Program with IGRINS on Gemini South. II. WASP-121 b has Superstellar C/O and Refractory-to-volatile Ratios. Astron. J. 168 , 293 (2024). [30] Pelletier, S. et al. CRIRES + and ESPRESSO Reveal an Atmosphere Enriched in Volatiles Relative to Refractories on the Ultrahot Jupiter WASP-121b. Astron. J. 169 , 10 (2025). [31] Borsa, F. et al. Atmospheric Rossiter-McLaughlin effect and transmission spectroscopy of WASP-121b with ESPRESSO. Astron. Astrophys. 645 , A24 (2021). [32] Wardenier, J. P., Parmentier, V., Line, M. R. & Lee, E. K. H. Modelling the effect of 3D temperature and chemistry on the cross-correlation signal of transiting ultra-hot Jupiters: a study of five chemical species on WASP-76b. Mon. Not. R. 

21 Astron. Soc. 525 , 4942–4961 (2023). [33] Kempton, E. M. R. et al. A Framework for Prioritizing the TESS Planetary Candidates Most Amenable to Atmospheric Characterization. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 130 , 114401 (2018). [34] Dholakia, S., Luger, R. & Dholakia, S. Efficient and Precise Transit Light Curves for Rapidly Rotating, Oblate Stars. Astrophys. J. 925 , 185 (2022). [35] Deline, A. et al. The atmosphere and architecture of WASP-189 b probed by its CHEOPS phase curve. Astron. Astrophys. 659 , A74 (2022). [36] Ahlers, J. P. et al. KELT-9 b’s Asymmetric TESS Transit Caused by Rapid Stellar Rotation and Spin-Orbit Misalignment. Astron. J. 160 , 4 (2020). [37] Christiansen, J. L. et al. The NASA Exoplanet Archive and Exoplanet Follow-up Observing Program: Data, Tools, and Usage. Planet. Sci. J. 6, 186 (2025). [38] Rustamkulov, Z., Sing, D. K., Liu, R. & Wang, A. Analysis of a JWST NIR-Spec Lab Time Series: Characterizing Systematics, Recovering Exoplanet Transit Spectroscopy, and Constraining a Noise Floor. Astrophys. J. Lett. 928 , L7 (2022). [39] Rustamkulov, Z. et al. Early Release Science of the exoplanet WASP-39b with JWST NIRSpec PRISM. Nature 614 , 659–663 (2023). [40] Sing, D. K. et al. A warm Neptune’s methane reveals core mass and vigorous atmospheric mixing. Nature 630 , 831–835 (2024). [41] Bell, T. et al. Eureka!: An End-to-End Pipeline for JWST Time-Series Observations. J. Open Source Softw. 7, 4503 (2022). [42] Liu, R., Wang, L.-C., Rustamkulov, Z. & Sing, D. K. Unveiling the Atmosphere of the Super-Jupiter HAT-P-14 b with JWST NIRISS and NIRSpec. Astron. J. 

169 , 335 (2025). [43] Mukherjee, S. et al. Cloudy mornings and clear evenings on a gas giant exoplanet. 

Science 392 , 858–862 (2026). [44] Wang, L.-C. et al. A Comprehensive Analysis of the Panchromatic Transmission Spectrum of the Hot-Saturn WASP-96 b: Nondetection of Haze, Possible Sodium Limb Asymmetry, Stellar Characterization, and Formation History. Astron. J. 

171 , 147 (2026). [45] Radica, M. et al. Awesome SOSS: transmission spectroscopy of WASP-96b with NIRISS/SOSS. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 524 , 835–856 (2023). [46] Fu, G. et al. Water and an Escaping Helium Tail Detected in the Hazy and Methane-depleted Atmosphere of HAT-P-18b from JWST NIRISS/SOSS. 22 Astrophys. J. Lett. 940 , L35 (2022). [47] Bourrier, V. et al. Hot Exoplanet Atmospheres Resolved with Transit Spec-troscopy (HEARTS). III. Atmospheric structure of the misaligned ultra-hot Jupiter WASP-121b. Astron. Astrophys. 635 , A205 (2020). [48] Newville, M., Stensitzki, T., Allen, D. B. & Ingargiola, A. LMFIT: Non-Linear Least-Square Minimization and Curve-Fitting for Python (2015). URL https: //doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.11813. [49] Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D. & Goodman, J. emcee: The MCMC Hammer. Publ. Astron. Soc. Pac. 125 , 306 (2013). [50] Speagle, J. S. DYNESTY: a dynamic nested sampling package for estimating Bayesian posteriors and evidences. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 493 , 3132–3158 (2020). [51] Grant, D. & Wakeford, H. R. Exo-TiC/ExoTiC-LD: ExoTiC-LD v3.0.0. Zenodo (2022). [52] Magic, Z., Chiavassa, A., Collet, R. & Asplund, M. The Stagger-grid: A grid of 3D stellar atmosphere models. IV. Limb darkening coefficients. Astron. Astrophys. 

573 , A90 (2015). [53] Falco, A., Zingales, T., Pluriel, W. & Leconte, J. Toward a multidimensional analysis of transmission spectroscopy. I. Computation of transmission spectra using a 1D, 2D, or 3D atmosphere structure. Astron. Astrophys. 658 , A41 (2022). [54] Tennyson, J. et al. The exomol database: Molecular line lists for exo-planet and other hot atmospheres. Journal of Molecular Spectroscopy 

327 , 73–94 (2016). URL https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ S0022285216300807. New Visions of Spectroscopic Databases, Volume II. [55] Leconte, J., Lai, D. & Chabrier, G. Distorted, nonspherical transiting planets: impact on the transit depth and on the radius determination. Astron. Astrophys. 

528 , A41 (2011). [56] Wallack, N. L. et al. JWST COMPASS: A NIRSpec/G395H Transmission Spectrum of the Sub-Neptune TOI-836c. Astron. J. 168 , 77 (2024). [57] Alderson, L. et al. JWST COMPASS: NIRSpec/G395H Transmission Observa-tions of the Super-Earth TOI-776 b. Astron. J. 169 , 142 (2025). [58] Rackham, B. V., Apai, D. & Giampapa, M. S. The Transit Light Source Effect: False Spectral Features and Incorrect Densities for M-dwarf Transiting Planets. 

Astrophys. J. 853 , 122 (2018). 23 [59] Kostogryz, N. et al. The Effect of Stellar Magnetic Activity on Measurements of Morning and Evening Asymmetry of Planetary Terminator. Astrophys. J. Lett. 

989 , L6 (2025). [60] Delrez, L. et al. WASP-121 b: a hot Jupiter close to tidal disruption transiting an active F star. Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 458 , 4025–4043 (2016). [61] Rackham, B. V., Apai, D. & Giampapa, M. S. The Transit Light Source Effect. II. The Impact of Stellar Heterogeneity on Transmission Spectra of Planets Orbiting Broadly Sun-like Stars. Astron. J. 157 , 96 (2019). [62] Evans, T. M. et al. An Optical Transmission Spectrum for the Ultra-hot Jupiter WASP-121b Measured with the Hubble Space Telescope. Astron. J. 156 , 283 (2018). [63] von Zeipel, H. The radiative equilibrium of a rotating system of gaseous masses. 

Mon. Not. R. Astron. Soc. 84 , 665–683 (1924). [64] Barnes, J. W. Transit Lightcurves of Extrasolar Planets Orbiting Rapidly Rotating Stars. Astrophys. J. 705 , 683–692 (2009). [65] Dholakia, S., Dholakia, S. & Pope, B. J. S. A General, Differentiable Transit Model for Ellipsoidal Occulters: Derivation, Application, and Forecast of Plane-tary Oblateness and Obliquity Constraints with JWST. Astrophys. J. 987 , 150 (2025). [66] Phan, D., Pradhan, N. & Jankowiak, M. Composable Effects for Flexi-ble and Accelerated Probabilistic Programming in NumPyro. arXiv e-prints 

arXiv:1912.11554 (2019). [67] Ahlers, J. P. et al. Gravity-darkening Analysis of the Misaligned Hot Jupiter MASCARA-4 b. Astrophys. J. 888 , 63 (2020). [68] Hoffman, M. D. & Gelman, A. The No-U-Turn Sampler: Adaptively Setting Path Lengths in Hamiltonian Monte Carlo. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1111.4246 (2011). [69] Monnier, J. D. et al. Imaging the Surface of Altair. Science 317 , 342 (2007). [70] Sing, D. JWST NIRSpec G395H phase curve of WASP-121b. MAST (2024). URL https://doi.org/10.17909/6qnn-6j23. [71] Splinter, J. WASP-121b JWST NIRISS/SOSS Phase Curve. MAST (2025). URL https://doi.org/10.17909/ppjp-9743. [72] Astropy Collaboration et al. Astropy: A community Python package for astronomy. Astron. Astrophys. 558 , A33 (2013). 24 [73] Astropy Collaboration et al. The Astropy Project: Building an Open-science Project and Status of the v2.0 Core Package. Astron. J. 156 , 123 (2018). [74] Astropy Collaboration et al. The Astropy Project: Sustaining and Growing a Community-oriented Open-source Project and the Latest Major Release (v5.0) of the Core Package. Astrophys. J. Lett. 935 , 167 (2022). [75] Foreman-Mackey, D. corner.py: Scatterplot matrices in python. J. Open Source Softw. 1, 24 (2016). URL https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.00024. [76] Hunter, J. D. Matplotlib: A 2D Graphics Environment. Comput. Sci. Eng. 9,90–95 (2007). [77] Harris, C. R. et al. Array programming with numpy. Nature 585 , 357–362 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2. [78] McKinney, W. Data structures for statistical computing in python (2010). [79] Virtanen, P. et al. Scipy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in python. Nat. Methods 17 , 261–272 (2020). URL https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41592-019-0686-2. 

# Extended Data                                      

> Extended Data Table 1 Metrics from the MCMC and nested samplings to the NIRISS SOSS first order white light curve.
> Data reduction Firefly Fu Model Mtra Mrot Mrot Mtra Mrot Mrot
> R2/R ∗free R2/R ∗= 0 R2/R ∗free R2/R ∗= 0
> MCMC sampling
> BIC -15356.39 -15419.00 -15415.50 -15373.82 -15422.91 -15418.24 ∆BIC 162.61 59.11 49.09 44.42
> Nested sampling
> ln( Z)7651.7 7676.6 7674.9 7659.4 7677.3 7675.8 ln( B)124.8 23.2 18.0 16.5
> 1Differences in Bayesian Information Criterion (∆BIC) and natural logarithms of Bayes factors (ln( B)) are all relative to Mtra .

25 Extended Data Table 2 Metrics from the MCMC and nested samplings, analyzing the white light curves from NIRSpec G395H NRS1 and NRS2 simultaneously. 

Data reduction Firefly Eureka! Model Mtra Mrot Mrot Mtra Mrot Mrot 

R2/R ∗ free R2/R ∗ = 0 R2/R ∗ free R2/R ∗ = 0 

MCMC sampling 

BIC -30417.62 -30440.52 -30453.45 -29958.45 -29999.89 -30013.13 ∆BIC 1 22.90 35.83 41.44 54.68 

Nested sampling 

ln( Z) 15154.8 15166.5 15168.4 14924.4 14948.1 14949.3 ln( B)1 11.7 13.6 23.7 24.9 

> 1

Differences in Bayesian Information Criterion (∆BIC) and natural logarithms of Bayes factors (ln( B)) are all relative to Mtra .

26 Extended Data Fig. 1 WASP-121 b’s white transit light curves observed with JWST/NIRISS SOSS and JWST/NIRSpec G395H. The same as Fig. 1, but using the Fu reduction of the JWST/NIRISS observations and the Eureka! reduction of the JWST/NIRSpec observations. 

27 Extended Data Fig. 2 Posteriors of selected fit parameters from the MCMC and using Mrot to NIRSpec’s white light curves reduced with Firefly. Blue contours show the posteriors from the light curve fit with R2/R ∗ = 0 and green contours show the posteriors with free R2/R ∗. The orbital parameters ( a/R ∗ and b) were shared between both detectors’ light curves and all other plotted parameters correspond to those that were fitted to the NRS2 light curve only. For the latter, equivalent parameters were fitted to the NRS1 light curve but are not shown for visual clarity. The values in the panel titles show the median and 1 σ interval of the fit parameters from the light curve fit with free R2/R ∗.

28 Extended Data Fig. 3 WASP-121 b’s transit radius as a function of time observed with JWST/NIRSpec and simulated using SPARC/MITgcm. The upper and lower panel show the obser-vations and model for the white light curves of NIRSpec’s NRS1 and NRS2 detectors, respectively. Lines show the median measurements with the 1 σ intervals of the measurements indicated using col-ored shadings. In addition to the model result shown with a dotted line, we also show a quadratic fit to that model using a solid magenta line. Any deviations of the quadratic fit from the model are well below the measurement uncertainties. 

29 Extended Data Fig. 4 TESS optical light curve of the transit of WASP-121 b showing asymmetry due to gravity-darkening of the rapidly rotating host star. The top panel shows the unbinned, phased TESS light curve centered around the transit, along with the gravity-darkened model overplotted in red. The bottom panel shows the binned residuals from a maximum a-posteriori (MAP) fit to a simple limb-darkened star without gravity darkening. Overplotted in red is the gravity-darkened fit. The error bars are 1 σ uncertainties. 

30 Extended Data Fig. 5 WASP-121 b’s radius polynomial coefficients (see Eq. 1) as functions of wavelength measured using the JWST/NIRSpec G395H observations and modeled using SPAR-C/MITgcm. Colored diamonds, squares and triangles indicate the medians of 125,000 posterior samples from the spectroscopic light curve fits with different assumptions about Rp/R ∗(t) and mod-eling approaches for the limb darkening coefficients (LDCs) and using one of the two data reductions. All markers’ horizontal bars indicate the wavelength ranges of the spectroscopic light curve channels and vertical error bars show the 1 σ range of the 150,000 posterior samples. The data were slightly offset to each other horizontally for increased visibility. Solid lines show the model predictions at a spectral resolution of R ∼ 600 and dots represent the model values binned into the same wavelength bins as the observations. In the upper panel, the model spectra were subtracted by a constant value so that their and Firefly’s R2/R ∗ = 0 observations’ mean between 2 .7 and 4 .0 μm match. Dashed grey lines at zero were added to guide the eye. 

31 Extended Data Fig. 6 Light curves integrated over the strongest CO bands in NIRISS and NIR-Spec. Both observations were reduced using Firefly. The first two rows show the raw light curves with the maximum-likelihood translational ( Mtra ) and rotational ( Mrot ) models inferred from a Markov-Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) sampling of the posterior probability. The second row shows a zoom into the bottom of the transit. Circles show the fluxes per integration normalized by the median fluxes measured during the secondary eclipse observed before the transit and error bars depict the 1σ intervals measured from 150,000 posteriors samples of the light curve. The transparent cyan and yellow lines depict models calculated from 100 samples randomly drawn from the MCMC chains of 

Mtra and Mrot , respectively. The third and fourth rows show the residuals between the maximum-likelihood models and the data. Vertical gray lines mark contact points 1, 2, 3, and 4 calculated from the planet’s orbital parameters and radius [27] with gray shaded regions indicating the times of ingress and egress. 

32 Extended Data Fig. 7 Equatorial cross-sections of WASP-121 b’s temperature field in the SPAR-C/MITgcm. The left panel shows the nominal temperature field and the right panel shows the temperature field of the ‘muted leading limb’ case. The modified temperature field is identical to the nominal case, but has the vertical temperature profile from 240 ◦ to 302 ◦ in longitude set to its struc-ture at 240 ◦. The atmosphere has been enlarged compared to the planet core for better visibility. 

33