Title: Environmental interactions in Class II systems and their impact on the disk-planet architecture

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.21533v2

Published Time: Wed, 24 Jun 2026 01:22:13 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. AA60874-26 ©ESO 2026 June 24, 2026 

# Environmental interactions in Class II systems and their impact on the disk-planet architecture 

Pedro P. Poblete 1, Nicolás Cuello 1, Tim D. Pearce 2, Antoine Alaguero 1, Josh Calcino 3, Daniel J. Price 4, 1, and Michael Ku ff meier 5. 

> 1

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, IPAG, 38000 Grenoble, France; e-mail: pedro.poblete@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr ; 

> 2

Department of Physics, University of Warwick, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK;  

> 3

Department of Astronomy, Tsinghua University, 30 Shuangqing Rd, 100084 Beijing, China;  

> 4

School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Vic. 3800, Australia;  

> 5

Niels Bohr Institute, University of Copenhagen, Jagtvej 155a, DK-2200 Copenhagen, Denmark. Received September XX, XXXX; accepted March XX, XXXX 

ABSTRACT 

Context. Protoplanetary disks evolve in clustered environments where interactions with nearby stars and interstellar gas are common. Such environmental processes, including stellar flybys and gas infall, can significantly perturb disk structures over the disk lifetime and potentially influence the evolution of embedded planets. 

Aims. We investigate how environmental interactions a ff ect the architecture of Class II systems that host both a disk and already-formed planets, and assess their impact on disk structure and dynamics, as well as planetary evolution. 

Methods. We performed three-dimensional simulations using the P hantom smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) code, including multiple dust species treated with a dust-as-particles approach that accounts for dust back-reaction on the gas. We modeled a disk hosting two planets in a 2:1 mean-motion resonance and subjected the system to two types of perturbations: an infalling gaseous cloudlet and a stellar flyby. 

Results. Infall and flyby perturbations change the disk morphology and dynamical state. Infalling gas increases the disk mass, angular momentum, and dynamically excites the dust to produce eccentric and multi-ring dust structures. The stellar flyby truncates the disk, compacting the dust distribution radially and enhancing episodic radial migration of dust grains. These processes excite eccentricity in both gas and dust, leading to distinct accretion pathways for the planets. In particular, the flyby promotes inward dust migration that may enhance solid accretion by the planets, while infall preferentially increases the accretion rate of the inner planet. 

Conclusions. Environmental interactions during the Class II phase can reshape disk–planet systems, imprinting dynamical signatures that may persist into later evolutionary stages. Both late infall and stellar flybys influence the growth and composition of planets; in particular, infall events can lead to the formation of eccentric, narrow debris disks. 

Key words. Hydrodynamics — Accretion, accretion disks — Protoplanetary disks — Methods: numerical — (Stars:) circumstellar matter — Planet-disk interactions 

1. Introduction 

Protoplanetary disks (PPDs) are circumstellar structures that form naturally during the early stages of star formation. They are composed primarily of gas, with a smaller fraction of dust. These disks are where planets form, by the growth of dust grains into planetesimals and fully formed planets (see Armitage 2018, for a brief review). The classical picture of PPD evolution assumes an isolated system, in which the star, disk, and forming planets evolve without external influences. While this framework is the-oretically well motivated, it does not fully capture the environ-ments in which disks are observed, as a substantial fraction of disks — approximately 55% in the Taurus star-forming region, for example — are subject to interactions with nearby stars and infalling gas in the interstellar medium (Garufi et al. 2024). Pfalzner (2013) defined a flyby as a single close encounter between two stars with a minimum separation smaller than 1000 au. The impact of a flyby on the perturbed system depends on the encounter strength, which Winter et al. (2024b) quantified in terms of the fraction of disk mass removed by the passing star. Encounters that remove ∼ 10% and ∼ 1% of the disk mass are classified as strong and weak, respectively. Based on this definition, the corresponding occurrence rates range from 

∼ 10 Myr −1 for strong encounters to ∼ 200 Myr −1 for weak en-counters. When a star hosting a PPD undergoes a stellar flyby, the disk morphology and dynamics can be significantly altered through tidal interactions, excitation of eccentricity, and other perturbations (Clarke & Pringle 1993; Cuello et al. 2019, 2023). The consequences of flybys are not limited to the disk itself but also a ff ect the architecture of embedded planets and protoplan-ets. Laughlin & Adams (1998) demonstrated that flybys can in-duce orbital disruption and eccentricity growth in Jovian planets, Malmberg et al. (2011) investigated planet ejection following stellar encounters, and Charalambous et al. (2025) examined the disruption of planetary mean-motion resonance (MMR) chains. Alternatively, star–disk systems can be influenced by the ac-cretion of gas from the interstellar medium. Infall refers to the process by which a system captures and accretes molecular cloud gas. Such events are especially common during the early stages of planet formation ( ≲ 1 Myr) and are associated with the high accretion rates in the observed in young stars, occurring in more 

Article number, page 1 of 13  

> arXiv:2606.21533v2 [astro-ph.EP] 23 Jun 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA60874-26

than 50% of Class 0 /I objects (Dunham et al. 2014; Hartmann et al. 2016) and related to the Bondi–Hoyle–Lyttleton accretion process during the post-collapse phase (Padoan et al. 2005; Win-ter et al. 2024a; Padoan et al. 2025). The occurrence rate depends on age, and in more evolved systems, namely Class II objects — stellar systems dominated by a PPD and potentially hosting al-ready formed planets — the rate is estimated to be ∼ 15% based on the census of the Taurus star-forming region (Garufi et al. 2024), and ∼ 20% of the total near-infrared sources observed to date (Garufi et al. 2026). The primary consequence of infall for protoplanetary disks is their rejuvenation, as the supply of fresh gas replenishes the system and enhances the accretion rate onto the central star. This process may trigger FU Orionis–like out-bursts (Padoan et al. 2014) and can potentially lead to a reclas-sification of the system toward earlier evolutionary stages, such as from Class I to Class 0 (Kurosawa et al. 2004; Dullemond et al. 2019; Ku ff meier et al. 2020, 2023). Additionally, infall can modify the disk’s angular momentum, potentially inducing mis-alignments and warps (Bonnell 1994; Bate et al. 2003; Thies et al. 2011; Wijnen et al. 2017; Ku ff meier et al. 2021, 2024; Pelkonen et al. 2025). Despite these potentially important ef-fects, the impact of infall events on planetary evolution remains poorly understood. Most existing studies focus on planetesimal formation through streaming instabilities and self-gravity (Schib et al. 2023; Hühn et al. 2025; Longarini et al. 2025), and only speculative scenarios about how planetary migration might oc-cur afterward (Zhu et al. 2010). The studies on flybys and infall discussed above have primar-ily focused on either the earliest stages of planet formation, when only a PPD is present, or on later stages, when planets dominate the system, and the disk has already dispersed. The intermedi-ate phase, in which both planets and a substantial gaseous disk coexist, remains largely unexplored. This stage corresponds to the transition from gas-rich (Class II systems) to gas-poor debris disks 1, with typical ages of ∼1–10 Myr for Class II objects and 

∼10–100 Myr (or longer) for debris disk systems. For a compre-hensive review of PPD evolution, see Williams & Cieza (2011) and Armitage (2020). During the gas-rich phase, PPDs commonly exhibit dusty, ring-like substructures associated with gas-pressure maxima, of-ten linked to the presence of planets (Andrews 2020). These fea-tures are likely precursors of debris disks, and any modification of their architecture would influence the subsequent evolution once the gas has dispersed. Environmental perturbations, such as stellar flybys or infall events, can alter these structures in ways that persist into later evolutionary stages, including mis-alignments between debris disks and their host stars (Hurt & MacGregor 2023). In particular, a specific class of debris disks — narrow and eccentric rings — might originate from such dy-namical perturbations during the PPD phase. Narrow and eccen-tric debris disks are not rare or exotic, comprising approximately 5–10% of the resolved systems observed to date (Hughes et al. 2018; Esposito et al. 2020; Han et al. 2026; Lovell et al. 2026). This relatively high frequency may indicate a shared underlying mechanism rather than stochastic or chaotic planetary evolution. These systems are di ffi cult to reproduce within standard secu-lar evolution models, since perturbing an axisymmetric debris disk with an eccentric planet will result in a broad disk with non-coherent eccentricities among the bodies that compose it (Faramaz et al. 2014; Pearce & Wyatt 2014). This suggests that their eccentricities may have been imprinted while the gas was still present (Kennedy 2020). Notable examples include the de- 

> 1Also referred to as exo-Kuiper belts or Class III disks.

Table 1: Disk parameters utilized in constructing the simulation. Name Unit Inner planet Outer planet Mass Mjup 1.00 1.00 

a au 53.74 85.40 

e - 0.24 0.06 

i degrees 0.00 0.00 

ω degrees 194.66 191.98 

Ω degrees 0.00 0.00 

ν degrees 136.02 90.63 

racc au 2.70 4.80    

> Notes. The planetary orbital elements: semi-major axis (a), eccentricity ( e), inclination ( i), argument of periap-sis ( ω), longitude of the ascending node ( Ω), and true anomaly ( ν). racc represents the accretion radius, which is approximately 1 Hill radius for a circular orbit.

bris disks around HR 4796A (Rodigas et al. 2015), Fomalhaut (MacGregor et al. 2017), HD 202628 (Faramaz et al. 2019), and HD 53143 (MacGregor et al. 2022). In this paper, we explore the consequences of environmen-tal interactions between PPDs and both stellar flybys and infall events. We aim to characterize the dynamical imprints that these perturbations leave on the disk and embedded planets, with par-ticular emphasis on the dust component. We further assume that the dust distribution traces the locations where planetesimals are likely to form and persist through the debris disk phase, thereby linking to observational signatures at later stages. The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the numerical meth-ods and simulation setup. Section 3 presents our main results. Section 4 discusses their implications. We conclude in Section 5. 

2. Methods 

We considered a representative Class II PPD architecture, as ex-emplified by the PDS 70 system. This choice is based on the simplest architectural scenario and on the absence of any ap-parent signal of environmental interactions. We emphasize that our study does not adopt the specific parameters of PDS 70, but rather focuses on its general structural characteristics. In partic-ular, we modeled a system consisting of a single central star, a disk (as reported by Keppler et al. 2019), and a pair of planets in MMR (as suggested by Keppler et al. 2018; Ha ff ert et al. 2019; Bae et al. 2019; Wang et al. 2021). We performed three-dimensional hydrodynamical simula-tions using the Phantom smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH) code (Price et al. 2018) to model the interaction between our Class II system and both infalling cloudlet gas and stellar flybys. The simulations considered gas and dust SPH particles and employed the dust-as-particles (or two fluid) approach to model gas–dust coupling (Laibe & Price 2012a,b; Mentiplay et al. 2020; Price & Laibe 2020), thereby self-consistently in-cluding the back-reaction of dust on the gas. 

> 2.1. Fiducial disk setup

We represented the stars and planets as sink particles (Bate et al. 1995), adopting a central star mass of 2 M⊙ and an accretion ra-dius of 1 au. We included two planets in an MMR configuration, initialized in a coplanar 2:1 MMR. The planet’s orbital parame-ters to achieve the MMR configuration are listed in Table 1. 

> Article number, page 2 of 13 Pedro P. Poblete et al.: Environmental interactions in Class II systems

The disk is modeled using gas and dust SPH particles. The gas disk is initialized with 10 6 particles in Keplerian rotation, a total mass of 10 −3 M⊙, and radial extent from Rin = 120 au to Rout = 220 au. The surface density follows a power-law pro-file, Σ ∝ r−1, while the disk is vertically isothermal with a tem-perature profile T ∝ r−0.5. These conditions yield a vertical as-pect ratio of 0.105 at Rin and 0.122 at Rout . We adopt an SPH shock viscosity parameter of αAV = 0.28, which corresponds to a mean Shakura–Sunyaev viscosity (Shakura & Sunyaev 1973) of αSS ≈ 3 × 10 −3.The dust disk is initialized with the same spatial distribu-tion and velocity field as the gas. An initial global dust-to-gas mass ratio of 0.01 is used, with a total of 10 5 SPH par-ticles split into five grain-size species, each represented by 2 × 10 4 particles. The grain sizes are spaced logarithmically, 

si = {9.48 , 34 .1, 122 , 440 , 1580 } μm. To quantify the degree of dust–gas coupling, we use the di-mensionless Stokes number (Birnstiel et al. 2016), St, defined as St =

r π

8

GM r3

ρs s

ρgcs

, (1) where G is the gravitational constant, M is the mass of the central star, and r is the radial distance. The quantity ρs denotes the in-trinsic dust grain density, assumed to be 3 g cm −3 for all species; 

s is the grain size, ρg is the gas density, and cs is the isothermal sound speed. The corresponding Stokes numbers for the di ff er-ent grain species are St ≈ { 0.03 , 0.13 , 0.50 , 1.70 , 6.10 } at Rin and in the mid-plane. The simulations are evolved for 100 outer-planet orbital pe-riods ( Tout ), or equivalently, 58870 years. This duration ensures that the dust species relax and form a well-defined dusty ring, thereby establishing a stable central cavity that hosts the two planets. The Stokes numbers evolve for each grain species, and they are St 0 ≈ { 0.11 , 0.35 , 1.25 , 5.60 , 16 .55 } at Rin and in the mid-plane by the end of this period. After 100 Tout , a single ex-ternal perturber — either an infalling cloudlet or a stellar flyby — is introduced. We also performed a control simulation that included the disk and planets without any perturbations. 

> 2.2. Environmental perturbers

For the infall simulations, we followed the infall prescription of Calcino et al. (2025), modeling the infalling gaseous cloudlet as an ellipsoid of revolution with semi-major and semi-minor axes 

A and B, respectively. We adopt A = 1000 au and B = 250 au, with a total mass of 10 −3 M⊙ distributed among 10 6 additional SPH gas particles. The ellipsoid is placed on a parabolic orbit, with its centre initially at 2250 au, resulting in a minimum ap-proach distance of 440 au (2 Rout ) on a coplanar, prograde tra-jectory relative to the disk plane and rotation. The velocity of each particle is initialized to the local free-fall velocity along the parabolic trajectory, with zero internal velocity dispersion within the ellipsoid. For the flyby simulations, we follow the stellar flyby pre-scription of Cuello et al. (2019). The perturber star is modeled as a sink particle with a mass of 1 M⊙ and an accretion radius of 1 au. It is initially placed on a parabolic orbit at a distance of 4400 au, which is ten times the closest approach distance of 440 au. The velocity of the sink particle is also initialized to the local free-fall velocity along the parabolic trajectory. 

3. Results 

After introducing either the infalling cloudlet or the stellar flyby, the simulations were evolved for an additional 200 Tout , giving a total evolutionary time of 300 Tout . We refer to the control run without external perturbations as the “Isolated” case, while the perturbed configurations are denoted as “Infall” and “Flyby”, re-spectively. The resulting changes in the system architecture are primarily reflected in the gas and dust morphology, as well as in the planetary accretion rates, which are discussed below. Ad-ditionally, Appendix A presents the evolution of the planetary orbital elements. As these parameters remain either unchanged or very similar to those in the Isolated case, they are not dis-cussed further in the main text and are included in the appendix for completeness. 

> 3.1. Gas disk

Figures 1 and 2 show the gas morphology and the corresponding azimuthally averaged surface density profiles for the three sim-ulated cases after 300 Tout . In all configurations, the gas compo-nent of the disk exhibits spiral arms, a characteristic outcome of planet–disk interactions (e.g. Ward 1986; Rafikov 2002). How-ever, their amplitudes di ff er significantly: the Infall case exhibits the largest surface-density enhancement, with a peak value of 

∼ 20% and ∼ 70% higher than those in the Isolated and Flyby cases, respectively, producing a pronounced azimuthal gas over-density. These trends are consistent with the global impact of each perturbation. The infalling cloudlet replenishes the disk by supplying additional mass, thereby increasing its angular mo-mentum and energy, as discussed below. In contrast, the stellar flyby tidally truncates the disk, leading to the opposite behavior. This di ff erence is quantified in Fig. 2. In the Infall case, the disk is denser beyond the orbit of the outermost planet, whereas in the Flyby case, the outer regions are depleted. At 200 Tout , both cases exhibit similar surface den-sities at 100 au; however, at 350 au, the infall case is denser by a factor of ∼ 3. By 300 Tout , the surface density profile becomes smoother, with surface densities in the Infall case exceeding the Flyby case by ∼ 50% at 100 au and ∼ 150% at 350 au. Con-versely, the flyby initially promotes gas transport across the orbit of the outer planet, as reflected in the surface density profile at 200 Tout . At 25 au, the surface density in the Flyby case is ∼ 25% higher than in the Infall case. This trend reverses by 300 Tout ,when the Infall case becomes ∼ 50% denser at the same radius. To characterize the disk, we computed the total angular mo-mentum, total energy, and angular momentum deficit (AMD) of all SPH gas particles within 350 au, since the disk viscously spreads beyond the initial Rin location at 120 au. We considered the central star as the origin to derive the mentioned quantities. The total angular momentum is defined as the sum over the indi-vidual contributions of each SPH gas particle, that is, 

L =

X

> i

ri × mivi , (2) where mi, ri, and vi are the mass, position, and velocity of an SPH gas particle, respectively. While for computing the total en-ergy, 

E =

X

> i

mi

|vi|2

2 − GM 

|ri|

!

. (3) The AMD is a measure of the degree of dynamical excitation in a system, originally introduced by Laskar (1997) to quantify  

> Article number, page 3 of 13 A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA60874-26

Fig. 1: Gas and dust surface density distributions at 300 Tout . The top and bottom rows show the gas and combined dust (all grain species) surface densities, respectively. The three columns correspond to the isolated (left), infall (middle), and flyby (right) cases. The gas surface density is displayed on a linear scale, while the dust surface density is shown on a logarithmic scale, both in units of g cm −2. The black dots indicate the positions of the planets, with their sizes corresponding to the adopted beam sizes. deviations from a coplanar, circular configuration in planetary systems. The AMD for the gas disk is shown in the bottom panel of Fig. 3. It is computed following the normalization adopted by Chambers (2001), defined as AMD = 1 − L

Pi Lcirc ,i

, (4) being Lcirc ,i the angular momentum of an SPH gas particle in a circular orbit at the same semi-major axis, computed as 

Lcirc ,i = GM m3/2

> i

√−2Ei

. (5) The time evolution of the total angular momentum and total energy of the gaseous disk are shown in the top and middle pan-els of Fig. 3. Before discussing the specific e ff ects of the Infall and Flyby scenarios, we first note the systematic decrease in an-gular momentum and energy observed in all cases. This behav-ior results from accretion onto the sink particles (the central star and planets), which progressively reduces the number of SPH particles contributing to the disk reservoir and, consequently, the computed global quantities. The evolution of the total angular momentum shows oppo-site trends in the Infall and Flyby cases. In the Infall scenario, the angular momentum increases by nearly 10% over ∼20 Tout ,whereas in the Flyby case it undergoes an abrupt decrease of about 30%. These behaviors are consistent with the respective addition and removal of material from the disk, as discussed above. The evolution of the total energy follows a similar trend in the Infall case, increasing by nearly 20%. In contrast, the Flyby case exhibits more complex behavior: an initial slight decrease is followed by a modest increase, then a further decrease towards the end of the simulation. This pattern can be interpreted as the combined e ff ect of mass loss due to gravitational capture and the transient gravitational perturbation from the passing star, which excites the disk. Comparatively, the ratio between the removal and injection for the total energy is smaller than for the total angular momentum for the Flyby case; the loss of angular mo-mentum is significantly larger than the transient and subsequent increase induced by the passing companion. This indicates that the flyby removes angular momentum from the disk more e ffi -ciently than it alters its total energy. Both the Infall and Flyby cases show an increase in the AMD, but they di ff er in both amplitude and duration. In the In-fall scenario, the AMD reaches nearly 10% of the value corre-sponding to a circular and coplanar configuration, whereas in the Flyby case, it rises to just above 5%. Thus, the peak AMD in the Infall case is roughly a factor of two larger, indicating a more dynamically excited disk for the studied scenarios. The du-ration of the excitation also di ff ers significantly between the two scenarios. Although both cases exhibit an initial sharp increase followed by a decline after about 10 Tout , the AMD in the In-fall case requires an additional 70 Tout periods to return to values comparable to those of the Flyby simulation, slightly higher than those of the Isolated simulation. By contrast, the Flyby case re-

> Article number, page 4 of 13 Pedro P. Poblete et al.: Environmental interactions in Class II systems

Fig. 2: Azimuthally averaged gas surface density profiles for the Isolated, Infall, and Flyby cases, shown in blue, green, and magenta, respectively. The segmented and solid lines represent evolving times of 200 and 300 Tout , respectively. The shaded ar-eas show the planets’ radial excursions, determined by their peri-center and apocenter distances. 

Fig. 3: Time evolution of the total angular momentum (top panel), total energy (middle panel), and angular momentum deficit (bottom panel) of the gas disk within 350 au. The color coding is the same as in Fig. 2. The total angular momentum and total energy are normalized to their initial values. The vertical magenta-segmented line marks the time of closest approach of the stellar companion. laxes to the same steady state in fewer than 5 Tout . This longer relaxation timescale in the Infall scenario arises because the gas cloudlet continues to interact with the disk even after the first encounter, which corresponds to the AMD peak. As material continues to accrete onto the disk, the system remains dynam-ically perturbed for an extended period, and it can even reverse the decreasing trend in AMD, as shown in Fig. 3, which begins to increase slightly at 250 Tout . This highlights a key di ff erence between the two studied excitation mechanisms: a stellar flyby produces a short-lived perturbation ( ∼ 10 Tout ), whereas infalling material triggers an initial disturbance that continues to modify the disk’s AMD over a longer timescale ( ∼ 70 Tout ), although its intensity decreases over time. Nevertheless, the AMD slowly increases by the end of the considered evolutionary time. 

> 3.2. Dust disk morphology

Changes in gas dynamics a ff ect dust evolution, depending on the degree of coupling between dust grains and the gas fluid. The Stokes number quantifies such a coupling, meaning dust grains with St ≪ 1 and St ≫ 1 are tightly coupled and decoupled with gas, respectively (see Birnstiel et al. 2016). Particularly, dust with St = 1 exchanges the most angular momentum with the gas. Our setup, described in Section 2.1 considered a range of grain sizes across the coupled and decoupled regimes at the initial state, i.e. St 0 ≈ { 0.11 , 0.35 , 1.25 , 5.60 , 16 .55 }. Figures 4, 5, and 6 show the resulting morphology of the dust disk for the Isolated, Infall, and Flyby cases, respectively, after 300 Tout .The dust morphology in the Isolated case, shown in Fig. 4, exhibits the classical features expected for a Class II system in the simplest configuration: a central dust cavity surrounded by a single circular and smooth dust ring, with no prominent features radially or azimuthally for all dust grains. A cavity surrounded by a smooth dust disk is observed in continuum observations of systems like PDS 70, where planets have been confirmed within the dust cavity (Keppler et al. 2019). The dust ring forms at the location of the pressure maximum generated by the outermost planet as it carves a gap in the disk, in agreement with theoretical predictions and numerical models (Fouchet et al. 2010; Pinilla et al. 2012). In the Isolated case, none of the dust species crosses the or-bit of the outermost planet, as they become trapped at the pres-sure bump. Even the smallest grains, despite being strongly cou-pled to the gas, remain su ffi ciently decoupled to prevent signif-icant inward drift across the planetary barrier. In the Infall and Flyby cases, however, the dust ring exhibits significant varia-tions across grain sizes. In the Infall scenario, the dust ring re-mains relatively narrow across all grain species, but an addi-tional secondary ring appears at smaller radii, interior to the in-ner planet’s orbit, for the smallest grains. The additional gas sup-ply, together with the initial impact of infalling material in the Infall case, overcomes the planetary barrier, allowing the small-est dust grains to reach the innermost regions of the disk. While in the Flyby case, the density waves induced by the passing star drive both gas and dust inward, allowing the dust population to enter the planetary orbits and reach the innermost regions. Nevertheless, we caution against over-interpreting the loca-tion of the inner ring, which appears at ∼ 40 au in our simula-tions. Although an inner ring is expected to form closer to the star, near the sublimation radius (Eisner et al. 2005; Andrews et al. 2009), its position in our models may be influenced by the adopted numerical setup, including the stellar sink radius and the orbit of the innermost planet. While the e ff ect of the sink radius is likely negligible given its value of 1 au, the planetary configuration may play a more significant role in determining the ring’s radial position, such as through resonance capture. An  

> Article number, page 5 of 13 A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA60874-26

Fig. 4: Dust surface density after 300 Tout for the Isolated case. The first panel shows the combined contribution from all grain sizes (“all grains”), as also shown in Fig. 1, while the remaining panels display the surface density of each of the five dust species separately. The surface density is presented on a logarithmic scale in units of g cm −2. Black dots mark the planetary positions, with their sizes indicating the adopted beam size. inner ring is therefore expected to form, but probably at a di ff er-ent radial distance. Moreover, at least two distinct levels of ec-centricity can be identified, as illustrated in the all grains panel of Fig. 5. The combined dust distribution suggests an azimuthal asymmetry: in one sector, all dust remains concentrated in a nar-row band, whereas on the opposite side it spreads out, forming a double-ring structure. This pattern arises from the impact of the infalling gas cloudlet in a specific azimuthal region of the disk, which coincides with the sector where all the dust remains more confined. In the Flyby case, gas is pushed inward as it crosses the outermost planetary orbit, as discussed in the previous section. This behavior a ff ects the dust distribution by allowing grains to cross planetary orbits and migrate into the inner regions of the disk. Unlike the Infall case—where only the smallest grains pro-duce an additional interior dust ring to the inner planet—the Flyby scenario forms such an inner ring for grains with s =

{34 .1, 122 } μm, while it is absent for the smallest grain size. This behavior suggests that radial dust migration is not driven solely by gas hydrodynamical e ff ects; rather, the gravitational perturbation from the passing star compresses the dust distri-bution radially, forcing grains to migrate inward. This is sup-ported by observations, but in the context of stellar multiplicity (Manara et al. 2019). Furthermore, the all-grains panel shows a broader outer ring than the other two simulated cases. In addi-tion, a double-ringed structure can be identified in the dust dis-tribution for grains with s = 440 μm, which likely results from the radial dynamical excitation triggered by the encounter. 

> 3.3. Dynamical excitation of dust grains

In Sect. 3.1, we quantified the level of dynamical excitation in the gaseous disk and, by extension, in the overall disk structure, given that gas is approximately two orders of magnitude more abundant than dust. However, dust does not necessarily respond to perturbations in the same way as the gas, as seen above. It is therefore necessary to independently quantify the level of dy-namical excitation in the dust component. Unlike the analysis in Sect. 3.1, where the disk was considered out to 350 au, we char-acterized the dust distribution within the radial range 80–150 au, corresponding to the location of the outer dust ring. The eccen-tricity of the dust disk for each grain size is computed as the median of the magnitude of the eccentricity vector, namely 

edisk = median vi × (ri × vi)

GM − ri

|ri|

!

. (6) We additionally computed ϖdisk as the median of the longitude of the pericentre of each particle. For completeness and direct comparison, we also compute the eccentricity of the gaseous disk within the same radial region. It is worth noting that edisk 

is derived from the intrinsic dynamical properties of particles, which can be easily obtained through numerical simulations. However, an alternative value, egeo ,disk , can be derived by fitting an ellipse to the dust morphology; this aligns with the eccen-tricity derived from observations of dusty rings. In the case of narrow rings, edisk and egeo ,disk only converge if the longitude of pericentre or each particle, ϖi, exhibits a low dispersion. This is important since, from a geometric fitting, it is possible to infer the physical eccentricity distribution. The dispersion was quan-tified by measuring the median absolute deviation σe and σϖ for the eccentricity and the longitude of pericentre, respectively. 

> Article number, page 6 of 13 Pedro P. Poblete et al.: Environmental interactions in Class II systems

Fig. 5: Same as Figure 4 but for the Infall case 

Fig. 6: Same as Figures 4 and5 but for the Flyby case 

> 3.3.1. Eccentricity evolution

The top row of Fig. 7 shows the resulting evolution of eccentric-ities for all dust species and SPH gas particles. The Isolated case remains nearly circular for both the gas and dust components with low dispersions. It is worth noting that the two planets are initially in a 2:1 MMR, with eccentricities of ∼ 0.06 and ∼ 0.24 for the outer and inner planets, respectively. Despite these rel-atively large planetary eccentricities, the dust disk remains es-sentially circular, while the gas disk shows only a marginal re-sponse, with its eccentricity increasing to ∼ 0.02. In the Infall case, a clear distinction emerges between cou-pled and decoupled dust grains. The coupled grains (St ≪ 1) exhibit similar evolutionary trends: their eccentricities peak at 

∼ 0.25 and subsequently decline gradually to ∼ 0.05 by the  

> Article number, page 7 of 13 A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA60874-26

end of the simulation. After the peak, their eccentricities remain systematically higher than those of the gas by approximately 20%. The two simulated decoupled grain populations (St ≫ 1) display di ff erent behavior. In general, their response to varia-tions in gas eccentricity is delayed, with the delay increasing as the Stokes number increases. Consequently, while the cou-pled grains begin to decrease their eccentricities after the peak, the decoupled grains continue to increase theirs. The grains with 

s = 440 μm reach a peak eccentricity of ∼ 0.20, whereas those with s = 1.58 mm attain a lower peak of ∼ 0.13. Despite di ff er-ences in eccentricity median values, the dispersion of all grains remains low and similar. These results confirm the scenario de-scribed in the previous section, in which multiple dust eccen-tricities coexist simultaneously for di ff erent grain sizes. This ef-fect is particularly noticeable from 175 Tout until the end of the simulation, where the largest grains retain the highest eccentric-ity among dust species despite having reached the smallest peak values earlier in the evolution. By the end of the simulation, as in the AMD trend change, gas begins to acquire eccentricity, and consequently, the remaining grains do as well. The behavior of the largest grains suggests that dust grains with larger Stokes numbers will maintain the highest eccentricities despite the cir-cularization of gas. The large eccentricities exhibited in the Infall case contrast with the AMD analysis discussed in Sect. 3.1, where the gaseous disk appears approximately relaxed by the end of the simula-tion. The apparent discrepancy can be explained by the di ff erent spatial regions considered in the two analyses. The AMD cal-culation includes the entire disk, whereas the eccentricity mea-surement focuses on the inner region. As a result, a fraction of the inner disk now appears dynamically excited, but this does not significantly a ff ect the global AMD. Because dust preferen-tially accumulates in this region, it e ff ectively traces the resid-ual dynamical excitation, distinguishing an eccentric inner disk region adjacent to the outer planet from a more dynamically re-laxed outer disk. However, regions beyond 350 au still contain infalling residual gas from the cloudlet, which is expected to ex-hibit increased eccentricity (e.g. Ku ff meier et al. 2021). These regions are likely to trigger the increases observed in dust eccen-tricities and AMD by the end of the evolutionary time. In the Flyby case, the dust and gas components exhibit a sim-ilar dynamical evolution. Their eccentricities initially increase to 

∼ 0.1, before decreasing to values below 0.05, where they sub-sequently remain. Their dispersions are also slow, indicating a coherent eccentricity distribution. Notably, by the end of the sim-ulation, the disk components still retain a non-negligible level of dynamical excitation, except for s = 440 μm, which experiences a modest increase. 

> 3.3.2. Longitude of pericentre evolution

The bottom row of Fig. 7 shows the evolution of the longitude of pericentre for all dust species and SPH gas particles. In the Isolated case, ϖdisk exhibits a broad distribution spanning nearly the full range of 0–360°, indicative of a lack of preferential ori-entation and an incoherent distribution. The introduction of per-turbers leads to a realignment of these values, again highlighting the distinction between coupled and decoupled dust populations. In the Infall case, ϖdisk exhibits a high degree of coher-ence across both dust and gas species as eccentricity increases. The values are confined to the range 200–220°, with negligi-ble dispersion. The ϖdisk of the strongly coupled dust grains closely follows that of the gas. In contrast, the s = 440 μm and 

s = 1.58 mm grains show a delayed response, similar to their ec-centricity evolution, with the largest grains exhibiting the longest lag. This behavior, together with the outlying eccentricity of the largest grains, supports the coexistence of multiple eccentric and aligned populations within the same dust ring (Fig. 5) for at least 

∼ 125 Tout . By the end of the simulations, both edisk and ϖdisk 

show a tendency toward convergence, potentially leading to the formation of a single, narrow, eccentric dust ring. In the Flyby case, the ϖdisk evolution can be divided into two phases. Immediately after the stellar encounter, ϖdisk be-comes relatively coherent across all species. This phase lasts for 

∼ 60 Tout . Subsequently, at ∼ 210 Tout , the gas ϖdisk shifts from 

∼ 300° to ∼ 100°. The strongly coupled grains, as well as the 

s = 440 , μ m species, follow this transition, accompanied by a marked increase in dispersion comparable to that of the Isolated case. In contrast, the s = 1.58 mm grains remain relatively co-herent for the rest of the evolutionary time. The resulting spread in ϖdisk leads to an overall broadening of the dust disk, as illus-trated in Fig. 6. To summarize the final states of edisk and ϖdisk , Fig. 8 shows the distribution of the largest dust grains in the hk -plane for the three simulated cases, where ( h, k) ≡ (e cos ϖ, e sin ϖ). The Infall case shows a single, coherent, and eccentric distri-bution, whereas the Flyby case is characterized by a less ec-centric, moderately coherent population, together with an ad-ditional, more dispersed component. We discuss the implica-tions for subsequent evolutionary stages, namely the debris disk phase, in Sect. 4.3. 

> 3.4. Planetary accretion

Planetary accretion is also a ff ected by infall and flyby events. Figure 9 shows the time evolution of the accretion rates for the two planets in the three simulated cases. In the Isolated case, the outer planet exhibits a higher accretion rate than the inner planet, as expected, since it accretes directly from the surrounding gas disk. During both the flyby and infall events, the accretion rate of the inner planet increases significantly, reaching peak values comparable to the steady-state accretion rate of the outer planet and nearly doubling its initial value. This enhancement is fol-lowed by a gradual decline. The outer planet, however, responds di ff erently in the two perturbed scenarios. In the Flyby case, its accretion rate increases by a factor of ∼ 2.5, whereas in the Infall case, the increase is more modest, reaching only ∼ 1.25 times its initial value. The latter trend indicates a reduction in the potential accre-tion onto the outermost planet in the Infall case, whereas the accretion behavior of the innermost planet remains broadly sim-ilar to that in the Flyby case. This reduction may be attributed to the additional angular momentum injected into the disk by the infalling material. As a consequence, gas originating from both the disk and the cloudlet acquires higher angular veloci-ties, making it more di ffi cult for the outer planet to e ffi ciently accrete the mixed material. This interpretation is consistent with the results of Ku ff meier et al. (2021), who found that retrograde infall enhances the accretion rate onto the central star. In a ret-rograde configuration, the relative angular velocities of the disk and cloudlet are reduced, leading to a net loss of angular mo-mentum. By analogy, such a configuration would likely facilitate accretion onto the outermost planet in our scenario, in contrast to the suppression observed for prograde infall. Overall, in the Infall case, the accretion rates of both planets remain higher than in the isolated case and decrease at a similar rate after 200 Tout . By contrast, in the Flyby case, both planets exhibit the highest accretion rates during the first ∼ 200 Tout 

> Article number, page 8 of 13 Pedro P. Poblete et al.: Environmental interactions in Class II systems

Fig. 7: Evolution of the median eccentricity and longitude of pericentre of SPH dust and gas particles within 80–150 au. The left, middle, and right panels correspond to the isolated, infall, and flyby cases, respectively. The top and bottom rows show the eccentricity and longitude of pericentre, respectively. The eccentricities of the di ff erent dust species are color-coded, while the gas disk is represented by a black dotted line. In the right column, the vertical black line marks the time of closest approach of the stellar companion. compared to the other cases, after which they drop below the Infall case and fall beneath the Isolated case by ∼ 250 Tout .These results have important implications for planetary evo-lution when considered together with the processes discussed in the previous sections. In the Flyby case, the accretion rates increase for both planets; however, the accreted material is not limited to gas. As shown in Sect. 3.2, the stellar encounter accel-erates radial dust migration by truncating the disk and increas-ing the steepness of the gas surface density, and forcing grains to cross planetary orbits. This suggests that the planets may ac-crete a larger fraction of solid material than in the Isolated and Infall cases, where dust predominantly remains trapped in the outer ring. Consequently, the Flyby case may lead to enhanced solid enrichment of the planets, potentially a ff ecting their chem-ical composition and metallicity. In the Infall case, the evolu-tion of planetary accretion rates is more counterintuitive: the in-ner planet shows the largest increase. This implies that the inner planet would accrete a substantial fraction of the additional ma-terial delivered by the infalling gas cloudlet during the initial encounter, comparable to that accreted by the outer planet. Nev-ertheless, this could change if a retrograde infall event is consid-ered. 

4. Discussion 

Considering environmental perturbers, such as infalling gaseous material or stellar flybys, during the late stages of planet forma-tion can significantly a ff ect the resulting planet–disk architec-ture. Although our study explored a limited set of parameters, the results reveal clear structural and dynamical signatures that may be extrapolated to a broader range of configurations. More-over, the signatures of these interactions may persist into later evolutionary stages and remain observable in evolved systems during the debris disk phase. 

> 4.1. Impact of initial conditions

A di ff erent choice of parameters for both the planet–disk system and the external perturbers can significantly modify the result-ing configurations. In this work, we assumed coplanarity at all levels, namely between the planets, the disk, and the perturbers. In a non-coplanar configuration, the orbital planes of the planets and the disk may be altered. Such interactions could modify the planet–planet architecture and potentially disrupt mean-motion resonances (Charalambous et al. 2025). In addition, the direc-tion of the disk angular momentum may vary, as explored by Ku ff meier et al. (2021) in the context of infall events. The mag-nitude of this variation depends on both the disk rotational inertia and the strength of the perturbation. The disk inertia is primar-ily determined by its mass distribution and viscosity, while the perturber controls the amount of angular momentum injected or removed. In the case of infall, this depends on the mass, impact location, and direction of the accreting material, whereas in the flyby scenario, it is mainly controlled by the mass, passing star’s pericentre distance, and orientation. The prevalence of gas disk eccentricity was investigated by Ragusa et al. (2018), who identified two regimes in which the eccentricity of the disk may either be damped or amplified, de-pending on the planet-to-disk mass ratio, at the expense of the planet’s eccentricity. Their results indicate that eccentric modes can persist for at least 10 3–10 5 planetary orbits; in our case, this corresponds to ∼ 10 5–10 7 yr. Additionally, this timescale is sup-ported by Ku ff meier et al. (2021), who, based on hydrodynam-ical simulations, report that an eccentric gaseous disk persists for at least 1 .5 × 10 5 yr. Thus, in an evolved system, the gas disk could retain a non-negligible eccentricity during its lifetime. However, these timescales are also sensitive to local disk con-ditions, such as pressure and viscosity (Teyssandier & Ogilvie 2016). Infalling material can especially modify the disk pressure profile by increasing the total mass and altering its optical prop-erties—e ff ects that our model simplifies by assuming an isother- 

> Article number, page 9 of 13 A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA60874-26

Fig. 8: Final distribution in the hk -plane for the dust grains with the highest Stokes number (i.e. s = 1.58 mm) in all simulated cases. The color coding is the same as in Figs. 2, and 3. The col-ored circles indicate the median eccentricity of each distribution, while the centroids are marked by thicker points. 

Fig. 9: Time evolution of the accretion rates onto the inner and outer planets, shown with solid and dotted lines, respectively. The color coding is the same as in Figs. 2, 3, and 8. mal equation of state. Furthermore, the aforementioned studies consider single-planet configurations, and, in the presence of an MMR, the outer planet’s eccentricity is constrained, which can modify the evolution of the disk’s eccentricity. Although gaseous eccentric features may dissipate on timescales of ∼ 10 5 years, dust particles with large Stokes numbers can preserve these sig-natures for longer periods and may remain observable in later evolutionary stages. 

> 4.2. Observational implications of environmental perturbations

Our findings can be compared with observations of systems re-ported in the literature. In particular, multi-wavelength studies can be used to characterize dust grains with di ff erent Stokes numbers (e.g., Alaguero et al. 2025), thereby testing the pro-posed solid segregation. The HL Tau system provides an illustrative example of an in-fall event. Classified as a Class I–II object (Furlan et al. 2008), it exhibits a multi-gap and ringed structure in millimeter emission (ALMA Partnership et al. 2015), consistent with the presence of embedded, nearly circular protoplanets (Dipierro et al. 2015). At the same time, spiral arms have been associated with a past in-fall event observed in the molecular line HCO +(3-2) (Yen et al. 2019). The coexistence of these features suggests that the disk may have su ffi cient rotational inertia, that the angular momen-tum carried by the infalling material is relatively low, and /or that the dust grains traced by ALMA are coupled from the gas. In this case, the disk can maintain a largely axisymmetric structure despite environmental perturbations. Among the observed systems with evidence of ongoing flyby interactions, ISO-Oph 2 and AS 205 are particularly notable for their substructure in continuum observations. (i) ISO-Oph 2, al-though interpreted as a wide binary system with a separation of 

∼ 240 au (Cieza et al. 2019), could be better explained by a flyby scenario. Its morphology consists of two non-axisymmetric rings separated by a central cavity of ∼ 50 au, together with a bridge connecting the two stellar components detected in 12 CO emis-sion (González-Ruilova et al. 2020). (ii) AS 205 is a triple sys-tem in which two components, AS 205N and AS 205S, are spa-tially resolved, with the southern component itself being a spec-troscopic binary (Eisner et al. 2005). A bridge connecting both components is also observed in scattered-light images (Weber et al. 2023), with a projected separation of ∼ 168 au. The south-ern component further exhibits a ring-like continuum emission with a semi-major axis of the order of 30 au (Kurtovic et al. 2018). The systems discussed above exhibit direct signatures of the environmental perturbations considered in this work. Detailed analysis of these systems should therefore focus on character-izing dust dynamics to assess the consistency between the ob-served solid distribution and our results. In particular, eccentric dust rings, together with multiple grain populations with dis-tinct eccentricities, emerge as common characteristic signatures of both infall and flyby events. On the other hand, the main dif-ference, despite the larger eccentricity reached by the Infall case, is the spread in the longitude of pericentre for most grains in the Flyby case. This may increase relative grain velocities and en-hance mutual destructive collisions. Our findings can also be used as a predictive framework. The systems HD 100546 (Pérez et al. 2020; Fedele et al. 2021) and L1448 IRS3A (Reynolds et al. 2024), for instance, show evi-dence of eccentric rings at millimeter wavelengths, which may point to past infall or flyby interactions. Such perturbations can imprint long-lasting structures on the disk that persist even after the gas has dissipated. This may provide a natural pathway to the formation of one of the most intriguing debris disk morpholo-gies: narrow, eccentric rings, as observed in Fomalhaut-like sys-tems. 

> Article number, page 10 of 13 Pedro P. Poblete et al.: Environmental interactions in Class II systems
> 4.3. Fomalhaut-like debris disks

Explaining narrow and eccentric debris disks within the frame-work of classical secular evolution is challenging. Perturba-tions of an initially axisymmetric disk by an eccentric planet are expected to produce a radially extended structure with non-coherent eccentricities among the constituent bodies. This, to-gether with the significant fraction of observed narrow, eccentric debris disks, suggests an alternative formation mechanism that remains unknown. Kennedy (2020) suggested these debris disks are born narrow and eccentric. More recently, Lovell et al. (2025) supported this scenario using N-body simulations of the Fomal-haut system, showing that although an eccentric planet can sus-tain the current eccentric disk morphology, such a planet is un-able to reproduce the disk’s narrowness, suggesting that Foma-lhaut’s disk was born eccentric, i.e., it acquired its eccentricity from its progenitor PPD. Accordingly to our findings, its origin may be linked to environmental perturbations, such as stellar fly-bys or infalling material occurring during the late stages of the PPD phase. Similar to the scenarios proposed by Lyra & Kuch-ner (2013) and Lin & Chiang (2019), our work suggests that it may not be necessary to invoke eccentric planets to produce ec-centric debris disks To extrapolate our results to the debris disk phase, it is impor-tant to note that the dust origin di ff ers between PPDs and debris disks. In debris disks, the dust population is not necessarily in-herited directly from the PPD; instead, most small grains are pro-duced through collisional cascades of larger bodies (Wyatt 2008; Löhne et al. 2008). In this context, dust particles with larger Stokes numbers become particularly relevant, as they more read-ily inherit dynamical perturbations during the PPD phase, as de-scribed in Section 3.3, and they transfer their orbital properties to the fragments when they collide (Wyatt et al. 1999). This sug-gests that high-Stokes-number dust preferentially traces the re-gions where larger planetesimals are likely to form, which sub-sequently evolve into the debris disk. As discussed in Section 3.3, the Infall case produces the ec-centric and coherent distributions needed to form narrow, eccen-tric debris disks. Nevertheless, this condition is necessary but not su ffi cient to sustain such a disk structure into the debris-disk phase. According to secular evolution theory (see Murray & Der-mott 1999), such distributions precess around a fixed point in the 

hk -plane corresponding to the forced eccentricity, with a corre-sponding forced longitude of pericentre, both quantities being functions of the orbital properties of the present planets, such as their eccentricities, longitude of pericentres, and semi-major axis. Over long timescales, this precession can have two e ff ects on particles depending on their properties and forced compo-nents values: 1. ( edisk , ϖ disk ) di ff ers from the forced components. This pro-cess randomizes the particles’ longitude of pericentre, re-sulting in a circular distribution of points around the forced eccentricity vector. Consequently, the dust disk attains a broader spatial extent, with its inner and outer edges linked to the minimum and maximum particle eccentricities, respec-tively. 2. ( edisk , ϖ disk ) aligns with the forced components.This process randomizes the particles’ longitude of pericentre; however, because their eccentricities remain close to the forced value, the resulting circular distribution is tightly clustered around it, and the deviation from the initial configuration is negligi-ble. Consequently, particles that began in a narrow, eccentric configuration will remain in that state. The formation and long-term maintenance of a narrow, ec-centric ring therefore requires that the grain distribution re-mains concentrated around the forced eccentricity in the hk -plane. To first order, the forced eccentricity can be set by the properties of the outermost planet. Using this approximation, we obtained forced components at the end of the simulation of (eforced , ϖ forced ) = (0 .047 , 225 .29°), comparable to those of the largest grains, ( edisk , ϖ disk ) = (0 .066 , 232 .41°). If the trends ob-served in the simulations persist, these values may converge over longer evolutionary timescales, becoming the infall onto a PPD, a potential progenitor of the Fomalhaut-like debris disks. 

5. Conclusion 

We investigated the impact of environmental perturbations — namely stellar flybys and gas infall events — on the evolution of a protoplanetary disk hosting a resonant pair of planets. By performing three-dimensional hydrodynamical simulations, we characterized the morphological and dynamical signatures of a representative Class II protoplanetary disk undergoing interac-tions with its environment. We highlighted potential dust struc-tures that could persist into the debris-disk phase as tracers of its dynamical history after gas dispersal. Our main findings are: 1. Both infall and flyby events significantly alter the global properties of the gaseous disk. Infall increases its mass bud-get, angular momentum, and energy, producing a dynami-cally excited disk. In contrast, stellar flybys truncate the disk, removing angular momentum and leading to a more compact disk configuration. 2. Dynamical excitation caused by these perturbations varies in both strength and duration. Infall results in a stronger and more prolonged excitation, leading to a more eccentric disk (e ∼ 0.04–0 .08; Figure 7), as continuous material accretion extends its influence. Flybys, however, occur briefly, causing a quick but short-lived disturbance. These di ff erences are ev-ident in the evolution of the angular momentum deficit and the disk’s eccentricity. 3. The dust component responds di ff erently from the gas, with a clear dependence on its degree of coupling to the gas. While strongly coupled grains closely follow the gas evolution, larger grains respond with a delay. Infall events create mul-tiple eccentric dust populations, marking a clear distinction between coupled and decoupled dust grains, whereas flybys encourage radial migration and produce a more compact spa-tial distribution of dust. Importantly, an infall can lead to narrow, coherently eccentric dust disks that may persist into later evolutionary stages, potentially explaining Fomalhaut-like debris disk structures. 4. Planetary accretion is influenced by environmental interac-tions. Flybys enhance accretion onto both planets and pro-mote the inward transport of solid material, potentially in-creasing planetary metallicity. Infall, in contrast, preferen-tially boosts accretion onto the inner planet, leading to a counterintuitive evolution of the accretion rates, in which the inner planet’s accretion rate increases more than that of the outer planet, which is near the disk’s inner edge. Our work compares two environmental e ff ects that previous studies have examined separately. Additionally, it suggests a po-tential link between events during the protoplanetary disk phase and structures in the debris disk stage, as our results naturally explain the origin of narrow and eccentric debris disks. Further studies should confirm or rule out whether such an architecture remains after long-term evolution. 

> Article number, page 11 of 13

A&A proofs: manuscript no. AA60874-26 

Acknowledgements. This project has received funding from the European Re-search Council (ERC) under the European Union Horizon Europe programme (grant agreement No. 101042275, project Stellar-MADE). TDP is supported by a UKRI Stephen Hawking Fellowship and a Warwick Prize Fellowship, the lat-ter made possible by a generous philanthropic donation. JC acknowledges sup-port from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under grant number W2533008. DJP thanks IPAG, CNRS and UGA for hospitality and sup-port towards local costs during his 2025 sabbatical in Grenoble where this work was completed. 

Data availability 

The data required to reproduce all figures in this paper are avail-able at 10.5281 /zenodo.20307800. We utilized the following public software: Phantom ,https: // github.com /danieljprice /phantom (Price et al. 2018), and Splash , https: // github.com /danieljprice /splash (Price 2007) 

References 

Alaguero, A., Ménard, F., Cuello, N., et al. 2025, A&A, 703, A210 ALMA Partnership, Brogan, C. L., Pérez, L. M., et al. 2015, ApJ, 808, L3 Andrews, S. M. 2020, ARA&A, 58, 483 Andrews, S. M., Wilner, D. J., Hughes, A. M., Qi, C., & Dullemond, C. P. 2009, ApJ, 700, 1502 Armitage, P. J. 2018, in Handbook of Exoplanets, ed. H. J. Deeg & J. A. Bel-monte, 135 Armitage, P. J. 2020, Astrophysics of planet formation, Second Edition Bae, J., Zhu, Z., Baruteau, C., et al. 2019, ApJ, 884, L41 Bate, M. R., Bonnell, I. A., & Bromm, V. 2003, MNRAS, 339, 577 Bate, M. R., Bonnell, I. A., & Price, N. M. 1995, MNRAS, 277, 362 Birnstiel, T., Fang, M., & Johansen, A. 2016, Space Sci. Rev., 205, 41 Bonnell, I. A. 1994, MNRAS, 269, 837 Calcino, J., Price, D. J., Hilder, T., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 537, 2695 Chambers, J. E. 2001, Icarus, 152, 205 Charalambous, C., Cuello, N., & Petrovich, C. 2025, A&A, 696, A175 Cieza, L. A., Ruíz-Rodríguez, D., Hales, A., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 482, 698 Clarke, C. J. & Pringle, J. E. 1993, MNRAS, 261, 190 Cuello, N., Dipierro, G., Mentiplay, D., et al. 2019, MNRAS, 483, 4114 Cuello, N., Ménard, F., & Price, D. J. 2023, European Physical Journal Plus, 138, 11 Dipierro, G., Price, D., Laibe, G., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 453, L73 Dullemond, C. P., Kü ff meier, M., Goicovic, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 628, A20 Dunham, M. M., Stutz, A. M., Allen, L. E., et al. 2014, in Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen, C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning, 195–218 Eisner, J. A., Hillenbrand, L. A., White, R. J., Akeson, R. L., & Sargent, A. I. 2005, ApJ, 623, 952 Esposito, T. M., Kalas, P., Fitzgerald, M. P., et al. 2020, AJ, 160, 24 Faramaz, V., Beust, H., Thébault, P., et al. 2014, A&A, 563, A72 Faramaz, V., Krist, J., Stapelfeldt, K. R., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 162 Fedele, D., Toci, C., Maud, L., & Lodato, G. 2021, A&A, 651, A90 Fouchet, L., Gonzalez, J.-F., & Maddison, S. T. 2010, A&A, 518, A16 Furlan, E., McClure, M., Calvet, N., et al. 2008, ApJS, 176, 184 Garufi, A., Ginski, C., Benisty, M., et al. 2026, A&A, 709, A269 Garufi, A., Ginski, C., van Holstein, R. G., et al. 2024, A&A, 685, A53 González-Ruilova, C., Cieza, L. A., Hales, A. S., et al. 2020, ApJ, 902, L33 Ha ff ert, S. Y., Bohn, A. J., de Boer, J., et al. 2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 749 Han, Y., Mansell, E., Jennings, J., et al. 2026, A&A, 705, A196 Hartmann, L., Herczeg, G., & Calvet, N. 2016, ARA&A, 54, 135 Hughes, A. M., Duchêne, G., & Matthews, B. C. 2018, ARA&A, 56, 541 Hühn, L.-A., Dullemond, C. P., Lebreuilly, U., et al. 2025, A&A, 696, A162 Hurt, S. A. & MacGregor, M. A. 2023, ApJ, 954, 10 Kennedy, G. M. 2020, Royal Society Open Science, 7, 200063 Keppler, M., Benisty, M., Müller, A., et al. 2018, A&A, 617, A44 Keppler, M., Teague, R., Bae, J., et al. 2019, A&A, 625, A118 Ku ff meier, M., Dullemond, C. P., Reissl, S., & Goicovic, F. G. 2021, A&A, 656, A161 Ku ff meier, M., Goicovic, F. G., & Dullemond, C. P. 2020, A&A, 633, A3 Ku ff meier, M., Jensen, S. S., & Haugbølle, T. 2023, European Physical Journal Plus, 138, 272 Ku ff meier, M., Pineda, J. E., Segura-Cox, D., & Haugbølle, T. 2024, A&A, 690, A297 Kurosawa, R., Harries, T. J., Bate, M. R., & Symington, N. H. 2004, MNRAS, 351, 1134 Kurtovic, N. T., Pérez, L. M., Benisty, M., et al. 2018, ApJ, 869, L44 Laibe, G. & Price, D. J. 2012a, MNRAS, 420, 2345 Laibe, G. & Price, D. J. 2012b, MNRAS, 420, 2365 Laskar, J. 1997, A&A, 317, L75 Laughlin, G. & Adams, F. C. 1998, ApJ, 508, L171 Lin, J. W. & Chiang, E. 2019, ApJ, 883, 68 Löhne, T., Krivov, A. V., & Rodmann, J. 2008, ApJ, 673, 1123 Longarini, C., Price, D. J., Kratter, K. M., Lodato, G., & Clarke, C. J. 2025, MNRAS, 541, 1145 Lovell, J. B., Hales, A. S., Kennedy, G. M., et al. 2026, A&A, 705, A200 Lovell, J. B., Lynch, E. M., Chittidi, J., et al. 2025, ApJ, 990, 145 Lyra, W. & Kuchner, M. 2013, Nature, 499, 184 MacGregor, M. A., Hurt, S. A., Stark, C. C., et al. 2022, ApJ, 933, L1 MacGregor, M. A., Matrà, L., Kalas, P., et al. 2017, ApJ, 842, 8 Malmberg, D., Davies, M. B., & Heggie, D. C. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 859 Manara, C. F., Tazzari, M., Long, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 628, A95 Mentiplay, D., Price, D. J., Pinte, C., & Laibe, G. 2020, MNRAS, 499, 3806 Murray, C. D. & Dermott, S. F. 1999, Solar system dynamics Padoan, P., Haugbølle, T., & Nordlund, Å. 2014, ApJ, 797, 32 Padoan, P., Kritsuk, A., Norman, M. L., & Nordlund, Å. 2005, ApJ, 622, L61 Padoan, P., Pan, L., Pelkonen, V.-M., Haugbølle, T., & Nordlund, â. «. 2025, Nature Astronomy, 9, 862 Pearce, T. D. & Wyatt, M. C. 2014, MNRAS, 443, 2541 Pelkonen, V.-M., Padoan, P., Juvela, M., Haugbølle, T., & Nordlund, Å. 2025, A&A, 694, A327 Pérez, S., Casassus, S., Hales, A., et al. 2020, ApJ, 889, L24 Pfalzner, S. 2013, A&A, 549, A82 Pinilla, P., Benisty, M., & Birnstiel, T. 2012, A&A, 545, A81 Price, D. J. 2007, PASA, 24, 159 Price, D. J. & Laibe, G. 2020, MNRAS, 495, 3929 Price, D. J., Wurster, J., Tricco, T. S., et al. 2018, Publications of the Astronom-ical Society of Australia, 35, e031 Rafikov, R. R. 2002, ApJ, 569, 997 Ragusa, E., Rosotti, G., Teyssandier, J., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 474, 4460 Reynolds, N. K., Tobin, J. J., Sheehan, P. D., et al. 2024, ApJ, 963, 164 Rodigas, T. J., Stark, C. C., Weinberger, A., et al. 2015, ApJ, 798, 96 Schib, O., Mordasini, C., & Helled, R. 2023, A&A, 669, A31 Shakura, N. I. & Sunyaev, R. A. 1973, A&A, 24, 337 Teyssandier, J. & Ogilvie, G. I. 2016, MNRAS, 458, 3221 Thies, I., Kroupa, P., Goodwin, S. P., Stamatellos, D., & Whitworth, A. P. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 1817 Wang, J. J., Vigan, A., Lacour, S., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 148 Ward, W. R. 1986, Icarus, 67, 164 Weber, P., Pérez, S., Guidi, G., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 518, 5620 Wijnen, T. P. G., Pelupessy, F. I., Pols, O. R., & Portegies Zwart, S. 2017, A&A, 604, A88 Williams, J. P. & Cieza, L. A. 2011, ARA&A, 49, 67 Winter, A. J., Benisty, M., & Andrews, S. M. 2024a, ApJ, 972, L9 Winter, A. J., Benisty, M., Shuai, L., et al. 2024b, A&A, 691, A43 Wyatt, M. C. 2008, ARA&A, 46, 339 Wyatt, M. C., Dermott, S. F., Telesco, C. M., et al. 1999, ApJ, 527, 918 Yen, H.-W., Gu, P.-G., Hirano, N., et al. 2019, ApJ, 880, 69 Zhu, Z., Hartmann, L., & Gammie, C. 2010, ApJ, 713, 1143 

Article number, page 12 of 13 Pedro P. Poblete et al.: Environmental interactions in Class II systems 

Fig. A.1: Evolution of the semi-major axis (upper left), eccentricity (upper right), inclination (lower left), and longitude of pericentre (lower right) of the inner and outer planets, shown by solid and dotted lines, respectively. The color coding is the same as in Figs. 2, 3, 8, and 9. 

Appendix A: Planetary orbital evolution 

Figure A.1 shows the evolution of the semi-major axis, eccen-tricity, inclination, and longitude of pericentre for both plan-ets. The semi-major axes remain essentially unchanged in all cases, indicating that neither planet undergoes significant mi-gration. For the remaining orbital elements, the perturbed cases closely follow the evolution observed in the Isolated case. Al-though small variations are present, their amplitudes are neg-ligible. Therefore, the main e ff ect of the environmental pertur-bations is not a direct modification of the planetary orbits, but rather the alteration of the disk architecture and planetary accre-tion discussed in Sect. 3.