Title: Evolution and Observable Properties of Rocky Planet Atmospheres

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11531v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 03:15:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 88

Markdown Content:
# Evolution and observable properties of rocky planet atmospheres 

# Marie-Luise Steinmeyer 1* , Lena Noack 2, Philipp Baumeister 2,Keiko Hamano 3,4 , M.J. Way 5,6 , Doris Breuer 7, Kanako Seki 8,Caroline Brachmann 2,7 , Fabrice Gaillard 9, Manuel Scherf 10 ,Svetlana V. Berdyugina 11 , Brice-Olivier Demory 12 1Institute for Particle Physics and Astrophysics, ETH Zurich, Wolfgang-Pauli-Strasse 27, 8093 Zurich, Switzerland. 

> 2

## Institute of Geological Sciences, Freie Universität Berlin, Malteserstr. 74-100, 12249 Berlin, Germany. 

> 3

## Division of Science, National Astronomical Observatory of Japan, 2-21-1 Osawa, Mitaka, 181-8588 Tokyo, Japan. 

> 4

## Earth-Life Science Institute, Institute of Science Tokyo, 2-12-1 Ookayama, Meguro-ku, 152-8550 Tokyo, Japan. 

> 5

## NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, 2880 Broadway, 10025 New York, USA. 

> 6

## Theoretical Astrophysics, Department of Physics and Astronomy, Uppsala University,Uppsala, Sweden. 

> 7

## DLR, Institute of Space Research, Rutherfordstrasse 2, 12489 Berlin, Germany. 

> 8

## Department of Earth and Planetary Science University of Tokyo, Komaba 4-6-1, Meguro-ku, 153-8904, Tokyo, Japan. 

> 9

## Institut des Sciences de la Terre d’Orléans,Université d’Orléans-CNRS-BRGM, Orléans, France. 

> 10

## Space Research Institute, Austrian Academy of Sciences, Schmiedlstrasse 6, Graz, 8042, Austria. 

> 11

## Istituto ricerche solari Aldo e Cele Daccó (IRSOL), Faculty of Informatics, Universitá della Svizzera italiana, Via Patocchi 57, Locarno, 6605, Switzerland. 

> 12

## Center for Space and Habitability, University of Bern, Gesellschaftsstrasse 6, Bern, 3012, Switzerland. 

1arXiv:2607.11531v1 [astro-ph.EP] 13 Jul 2026 *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): msteinmeyer@phys.ethz.ch; 

Abstract 

The atmospheric composition of rocky exoplanets offers an important tool for constraining the properties of the interior of this type of planet, beyond what is possible from measurements of their mass and radius alone. However, the inter-pretation of these observations requires an understanding of the complex interplay of a larger number of coupled planetary and atmospheric processes. This review provides an overview of the current state of knowledge regarding rocky exoplanet atmospheres, beginning with their formation and escape mechanisms. We specif-ically highlight the importance of long-term interaction between the atmosphere, the surface, and the interior on rocky planets. Furthermore, this review addresses the influence of biological activity and photochemical reactions on the atmo-spheric compositions. Consequently, establishing how these different processes contribute to shaping the atmospheres of rocky exoplanets during their evolu-tion is fundamental for the characterization of these planets with future space missions and ground-based surveys.  

> Keywords: Exoplanets, Exoplanet atmospheres, Exoplanet observation, extrasolar rocky planets, Exoplanet atmospheric evolution

# 1 Introduction 

Three decades after the discovery of the first exoplanet around a Sun-like star by Mayor and Queloz (1995), the focus of the field has shifted from the mere detection of exoplanets to their detailed characterization. The atmospheres of rocky exoplanets are of particular interest. This review provides a summary of the major findings on the formation, evolution, and properties of rocky exoplanet atmospheres. 

# 1.1 Atmospheres in the solar system 

Our understanding of planetary atmospheres is mainly derived from laboratory exper-iments as well as from the observed diversity of atmospheres in the present-day solar system (Fig. 1). The composition of the atmospheres of the gas and ice giants (Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune) is, at least with respect to their main components, remarkably similar to the solar atmosphere. This indicates their primordial origin from the planetary nebula during the accretion phase of planets, where the main gases avail-able in the system (hydrogen and helium, as well as trace amounts of other gases) were gravitationally captured by the accreting planets (e.g. Hayashi et al, 1979). For the rocky planets in the Solar System, it is generally believed that they either never accreted a primordial atmosphere or that they lost their primordial atmosphere during the early stages of their evolution via different mechanisms (e.g., Lammer et al, 2018). 2Venus and Mars, the two neighboring planets of our Earth, both harbor a CO 2-dominated atmosphere, despite their different locations at the inner and outer edge of the habitable zone (e.g. Kasting et al, 1993), and their different planetary masses (Venus being almost as massive as Earth, but Mars only one tenth of the mass of Earth). The striking difference between these two atmospheres is the surface pressure – with Venus’ atmospheric pressure being about 100 times the pressure of Earth, and Mars’ about 1/100. Several studies (e.g. Jakosky et al, 2018; Sakai et al, 2018; Scherf and Lammer, 2021; Lichtenegger et al, 2022; Hu and Thomas, 2022; Thomas et al, 2023) have tried to link the thin atmosphere on Mars with atmospheric loss processes and its magnetic field (see Section 2), but it is still a topic of active debate.  

> Fig. 1 There are three main types of atmospheric compositions observed in the solar system: primor-dial atmospheres (Sun and gas giants), carbon-dioxide-dominated atmospheres (Venus and Mars), as well as nitrogen-dominated atmospheres (Earth and Titan).

The third type of atmosphere observed in the present-day solar system is nitrogen-dominated and appears on four very different bodies – on Earth and Titan, and, as collisionless exospheres, on Pluto and Triton. Titan has a reduced chemistry nitrogen-dominated atmosphere with trace amounts of methane, (e.g. MacKenzie et al, 2021), while on Earth, the nitrogen-dominated atmosphere together with a strong oxygen contribution is linked to the existence of life (Schirrmeister et al, 2015; Sproß et al, 2021) and the invention of photosynthesis. Pluto and Triton, in contrast, both have tenuous N 2-dominated exospheres with minor amounts of CO and CH 4 that originate from vapor-pressure equilibria with their icy surfaces (e.g., Scherf et al, 2025). The question of how Earth’s atmosphere would look like today if life had never evolved on Earth is a topic of active debate, especially in light of the discovery of rocky exoplanets in the habitable zone (HZ) around other stars. Although a lifeless Earth is likely similar to the late Hadean/early Archean eon, there are indications of similar or lower atmospheric pressure levels of nitrogen than today. For example, Marty et al (2013) 3used isotopic data for 3.0-3.5 Ga to find that N 2 was 0.5–1.1 bar. Avice et al (2018) found at 3.3 Ga that pN 2 was similar or lower than today. Using a variety of different methods (e.g., fossil raindrops, lava vesicle sizes, oxidation of micrometeorites) at 

∼2.6–2.7 Ga, the total pressure could have been as low as 0.23 bar (Som et al, 2012; Som et al, 2016; Rimmer et al, 2019). Higher CO 2 partial pressures in the Archean (Catling and Zahnle, 2020) are supported by the work of Kanzaki and Murakami (2015); Charnay et al (2017); Lehmer et al (2020); Feulner et al (2023). The evolution of the post-accretion period of Earth’s atmosphere – or of any of the rocky bodies’ atmospheres – remains poorly understood. Studies have produced a wide range of possible atmospheres (from highly reduced to oxidized) in the magma ocean phase (e.g. Bower et al, 2019; Maurice et al, 2024) for which there are few constraints. For the other rocky bodies in the solar system, there is little information on the nature of the atmosphere during the accretion and magma ocean stage, although Titan’s nitrogen isotope indicates that its atmosphere mainly comes from the accretion of NH 3 ice and complex N-bearing organics (Miller et al, 2019; Erkaev et al, 2021).   

> Fig. 2Sketch for the atmospheric evolution of an Earth-like planet from accretion (primordial atmosphere) via magma ocean crystallization and outgassing to a secondary atmosphere shaped by volcanic outgassing, or (in the case of Earth) by life (tertiary atmosphere).

Secondary outgassing by volcanic activity shapes the atmosphere of rocky planets during their long-term evolution. Note that for geological studies, the term sec-ondary outgassing often does not encompass the magma ocean phase, whereas from 4an astronomer point of view as well as within this review chapter (see Fig. 2) a sec-ondary atmosphere includes any outgassing from the interior including dissolution of volatiles from the magma ocean (e.g. Bower et al, 2019; Maurice et al, 2024). It should be noted that the atmospheric composition can differ from the composition of volcanic gases expected to be degassed at the surface of a planet based on the local melt composition and redox state, as gases may remain dissolved in the melt based on their solubility depending on the already existing atmospheric partial pressures (e.g. Gaillard and Scaillet, 2014; Gaillard et al, 2022; Sossi et al, 2023). The atmosphere can change over geological timescales through different processes. These may include material in-fall (e.g., meteorites, comets), various atmospheric escape processes (Gronoff et al, 2020), condensation of different species, weathering processes at the surface (Walker et al, 1981), or even large volcanic outgassing (e.g. Wignall, 2011; Bond and Grasby, 2017). In the case of Earth, biology led to an oxygen-rich atmosphere after the Great Oxygenation Event more than 2.5 Gyr ago (e.g. Alcott et al, 2019). We term this the tertiary atmosphere in Fig. 2. 

# 1.2 Atmospheres of exoplanets 

Beyond the solar system, different direct and indirect methods exist to detect and characterize planetary atmospheres. The first detection of an exoplanetary atmosphere was achieved for the hot Jupiter HD209458b using transit spectroscopy by Charbon-neau et al (2002), who measured an additional dimming of the star in the sodium resonance doublet by about 200 parts per million (ppm) as compared to the nearby continuum. This technique has become a leading approach for detecting exoplanetary atmospheres and characterizing their gaseous composition. Whether an exoplanet is a gas giant or rocky planet can be determined indirectly based on their size, via transit spectroscopy, and the bulk density, via mass estimation using radial velocity measurements. Based on current observations, alongside theoret-ical work, rocky planets may be roughly limited to < 1.5 R⊕ (Rogers, 2015; Fulton et al, 2017; Petigura et al, 2022), although this value has been challenged by other statistical analyses of mass-radius data yielding values of 1.23 +0 .44  

> −0.22

(e.g. Chen and Kipping, 2016). In general, the radius gap is mostly a population-level property, and classifying individual planets by their location relative to the gap is to be treated with caution (see e.g, the discussion in Baumeister, Miozzi, et al. 2025, this Topical collec-tion). The location of the radius gap further depends strongly on the stellar type and the orbital period (Petigura et al, 2022; Ho and Van Eylen, 2023; Parc et al, 2024; Venturini et al, 2024). Outliers have been repeatedly detected, and for each assumed transition mass/radius from rocky to sub-Neptune planets (with large fractions of volatiles in the form of gases, liquids and/or ices), there will be individual planets of smaller mass/radius with an extended radius (likely not rocky), such as L 98-58b (Demangeon et al, 2021) or Kepler-138 d (Piaulet et al, 2023), as well as larger plan-ets with high densities indicating rocky planets. There is the suggested super-Mercury Kepler-107c with (based on current observations) 10 M⊕ and 1.6 R⊕ (Bonomo et al, 2023) leading to a density even higher than expected for a scaled-up Mercury planet. This suggests very small fractions of silicate materials mixed with heavy metals, while leaving almost no room for a substantial atmosphere. Rocky super-Earths and gaseous 5sub-Neptunes may actually share a common origin, with different atmospheric loss processes dividing the sample into two subgroups (see section 2.3). Another indirect indication of an atmosphere comes from the evaluation of flux variations during the orbit (phase-curves). In particular, measurements of the rise and ebb of an exoplanet’s flux can provide constraints on a potential atmosphere. Depend-ing on the wavelength, exoplanet phase-curves may probe predominantly thermal or reflective components of the planet’s outgoing radiation, or their combination (e.g., Wong, 2021), The first detection of thermal radiation from an exoplanet (Deming et al, 2005) and subsequent infrared phase-curve measurements (Knutson et al, 2007) allowed for the detection of clear atmosphere signatures on hot Jupiters. The thermal phase-curve amplitude was found to be significantly smaller than the planet’s thermal emission measured during the occultation by the star (eclipse). This flux difference pointed to a significant part of the heat being recirculated from the day-side to the night-side of the planet. This recirculation was further corroborated by the East-ward shift of the phase-curve peak induced by the characteristic strong super-rotation occurring in the atmospheres of tidally-locked planets (Showman and Guillot, 2002). Direct imaging studies of young gas giants also indicate cloudy and dusty atmospheres (e.g., Marois et al, 2010). Optical phase-curves inform about the atmosphere’s reflective properties, such as the wavelength-dependent geometrical albedo and the presence of hazes and clouds. For example, Rayleigh scattering on gas-phase atoms and molecules and small parti-cles (haze, aerosols, etc.) produces a characteristic blueward slope in transit spectra. This was first found on the hot Jupiter HD189733b using transit spectroscopy at wavelengths longer than 550 nm (Pont et al, 2008). A high albedo of this exoplanet in the blue (at 450 nm and shorter) was first determined using polarized-light optical phase-curves (Berdyugina et al, 2008, 2011) and subsequently confirmed by near-UV secondary eclipse spectroscopy (Evans et al, 2013). Thus, the Rayleigh slopes and high geometrical albedoes of exoplanets may indicate the presence of the atmospheres, hazes and clouds (e.g., Demory et al, 2013; Sing et al, 2016). The same general principles apply to the smaller rocky exoplanets. While there are hints of an atmosphere surrounding 55 Cnc e (Mahapatra et al, 2017; Hu et al, 2024), the definitive evidence for an atmosphere around a rocky planet orbiting a cool star is still lacking. The absence of such atmospheres have been confirmed in several cases, either from thermal phase-curve measurements (e.g. Kreidberg et al, 2019) or occul-tations for those rocky exoplanets subject to high instellation (e.g. August et al, 2025; Meier Valdés et al, 2025). For more temperate planets (Venus-like or slightly hotter), such as TRAPPIST-1b and TRAPPIST-1c, current observations are still compatible with both an airless or atmosphere scenario (e.g. Greene et al, 2023; Zieba et al, 2023; Ducrot et al, 2025). The true characterization of the atmospheric chemical composition needs spec-troscopic measurements to identify individual species in the atmosphere – via transmission, reflection or emission spectroscopy. For gas giants and sub-Neptunes, these methods have been successfully applied to detect a variety of gases such as Na I, 6H2O, CH 4, CO 2, CO, and SO 2 (e.g., Charbonneau et al, 2002; Belu et al, 2011; Wake-ford et al, 2018; Benneke et al, 2024; Powell et al, 2024; Beatty et al, 2024; Kempton and Knutson, 2024). Scattering on particles (aerosols) in exoplanetary atmospheres, such as cloud con-densations and photochemical hazes, reduces the contrast of spectral signatures of gas-phase molecules, that makes them challenging to detect (e.g. Fauchez et al, 2019). In some extreme cases, even flat spectra have been observed, strongly suggesting the presence of aerosol-rich atmospheres (e.g., Kreidberg et al, 2014; Gao et al, 2021). Overall, observations by Hubble , Spitzer and JWST reveal that aerosols are common in exoplanetary atmospheres, but disentangling particle sizes, composition and their height distribution in models remains a challenge due to multiple degeneracies. Featureless or heavily muted transmission spectra of lower-mass exoplanets (sub-Neptunes/super-Earths) is a pattern that emerged in early observations (e.g., Kreidberg et al, 2014) and consistently strengthened by the current JWST data and atmospheric retrievals (e.g., Fauchez et al, 2019; Madhusudhan et al, 2025). Along with the detection of multiple carbon-bearing molecules (CH 4, CO 2) and molecules previously hidden by aerosols, JWST data expose new inconsistencies that aerosol models must explain, in particular the complexity and heterogeneity of these atmo-spheres. For example, high metallicity, non-equilibrium chemistry (e.g., Jaziri et al, 2025) as well as organic and graphite hazes in carbon-rich atmospheres (e.g., Li et al, 2025) can explain some of the observed features. In the future, spectra from rocky planets at large angular separations from their host stars can be directly observed in the optical and infrared using imaging coronog-raphy (e.g., Wolff et al, 2024), nulling interferometry (Quanz et al, 2022), etc. A detailed overview of different current and future observational capabilities from space and ground is given in Lagage et al (2026, this Topical collection). 

# 2 Formation and loss processes of atmospheres 

# 2.1 Formation 

Figure 2 shows that the atmosphere of a rocky planet can be separated into primor-dial and secondary atmospheres. The primordial atmosphere (section 2.1.1) is formed from gas of the accretion disk during planet formation. The secondary atmosphere (section 2.1.2) is composed of volatiles that are initially brought to the planet with colliding planetesimals, impacting asteroids and comets, and are later released by var-ious outgassing processes: During impact outgassing, which occurs particularly during accretion, volatiles are released directly into the atmosphere and do not accumulate in the forming planet at all. For other outgassing processes such as magma ocean out-gassing and volcanic outgassing, the volatiles that are initially stored in the planet’s interior during accretion are released later. 

## 2.1.1 Primordial atmospheres 

Modern planet formation predicts that rocky planets form at least partly in the pro-toplanetary disk of the host star (see e.g., reviews by Raymond and Morbidelli, 2022; 7Drążkowska et al, 2023). These disks are mainly composed of gaseous hydrogen and helium (Armitage, 2011). If the thermal energy of a gas particle in the vicinity of a protoplanet is not enough to overcome the gravitational pull from the protoplanet, the gas particle is bound to the planet. The radius at which the thermal energy of a gas particle and the gravitational energy of the protoplanet are roughly equal is called the Bondi radius (Ikoma and Genda, 2006). Thus, any planet for which the Bondi radius is larger than the radius of the planet itself binds gas from the surrounding protoplan-etary disk (Ikoma and Hori, 2012; Lee et al, 2014; Ginzburg et al, 2016). As the gas around the protoplanet cools and contracts, more and more gas will be gravitationally bound to the protoplanet (Ikoma and Genda, 2006; Lee and Chiang, 2015; Ginzburg et al, 2016). This minimum mass is small enough that rocky planets that form within the life-time of the protoplanetary disks will bind a primordial atmosphere. It is generally assumed that this primordial atmosphere is in hydrostatic equi-librium and consists of an inner convective and an outer radiative region (Piso and Youdin, 2014). At the outer boundary, the Bondi radius, the pressure and temperature correspond to the local disk conditions. The opacity of the atmosphere plays an important role in shaping the profile of the atmosphere by determining the location of the radiative-convective boundary. There are two potential opacity sources, the gas itself and absorption by dust grains (Semenov et al, 2003). The opacity contribution of dust grains depends on their size, as larger grains contribute less to the opacity. However, both analytical and numerical models of dust growth in primordial atmospheres, show that the contribution of dust grains to the opacity is low (Mordasini, 2014; Ormel, 2014). Therefore, primordial atmospheres can be assumed to be grain-free, with the gas opacity being the dominant opacity source. The total accreted mass of a primordial atmosphere depends both on the local disk conditions and the optical properties of the atmosphere itself. Figure 3 compares an analytic estimation of the atmosphere mass fraction as a function of planet mass by Ginzburg et al (2016) to the numerical fit by Mordasini (2020). Ginzburg et al (2016) assume that the atmosphere mass is concentrated in the convective region and find 

Matm 

Ms

≈ 0.02 

 Ms

M⊕

0.8  Teq 

10 3 K

−0.25  tdisk 

1 Myr 

0.5

. (1) Here Matm is the atmospheric mass, Ms the mass of the solid planet, Teq the equilib-rium temperature, and tdisk the life-time of the disk. Mordasini (2020) on the other hand, use a population synthesis approach to find the mean primordial atmosphere mass fraction as a function of the solid planet mass and the orbital distance aMatm 

Ms

= 0 .005 

 Ms

M⊕

1.23  a

0.1 au 

0.72 

. (2) Both scaling relations estimate that the final primordial atmospheric mass fraction of an Earth-sized rocky planet is ∼ 1 % whereas a 10 M⊕ super-Earth can have a primordial atmospheric mass fraction of ∼ 10 % .810 1 10 0 10 1

Ms [M ]                           

> 10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> Matm /Ms
> M20, 0.1 AU
> G16, 0.1 AU
> M20, 1 AU
> G16, 1 AU Fig. 3Comparison of the analytic scaling law for the primordial atmospheric mass fraction (Matm /M s) by Ginzburg et al (2016) (orange line) to the fit to numerical simulations by Mordasini (2020) (green line). Dotted lines refer to planets with an orbital distance of a= 0 .1 au and solid lines to a= 1 au . In all cases, the mass fraction of a primordial atmosphere of an Earth-sized planet is
> ∼1 % , while a 10 M⊕planet has a primordial atmospheric mass fraction of ∼10 % .

Initially, the composition of the primordial atmosphere corresponds to the compo-sition of the protoplanetary disk. However, if the growth of the planet is dominated by smaller bodies (‘pebbles’), the heating of the atmosphere by the release of gravita-tional energy leads to an enrichment of the atmosphere in heavier species due to the sublimation of the incoming bodies (Lambrechts et al, 2014; Alibert, 2017; Brouwers et al, 2018; Steinmeyer et al, 2023). Fragmentation and ablation of the accreted bodes can further enrich the atmosphere in elements other than H and He (Hori and Ikoma, 2011; Venturini et al, 2016; Mol Lous et al, 2024). The long-term evolution of such polluted primordial atmosphere is still uncertain (Vazan et al, 2024). One important consequence of atmospheric pollution is that it lowers the critical core mass to values as low as a few Earth masses (Hori and Ikoma, 2011; Venturini et al, 2015). This is the critical core mass at which a planet enters run-away gas accretion and turns into a gas giant. The existence of super-Earths and sub-Neptunes demonstrates that it needs to be possible to avoid this runaway growth. Possible mechanisms for this are late formation (Lee and Chiang, 2016), interrupted accretion due to a gap opening further out in the disk (Fung and Lee, 2018; Ginzburg and Chiang, 2019), and high opacity atmospheres (Lee et al, 2014). For close-in planets, it has been proposed that the dominant mechanism to avoid run-away gas accretion is the recycling flows between the atmosphere and the surrounding protoplanetary disk (Ormel et al, 2015; Moldenhauer et al, 2022). While rocky planets will lose their primordial atmospheres during their later evo-lution, see section 2.2, these initial atmospheres can leave imprints on the planet’s 9interior. The combination of the heat from accretion and the heat produced by radioac-tive decay leads to the formation of a deep magma ocean. Hydrogen and noble gases such as He and Ne can readily dissolve into the magma ocean and later be sequestered in the mantle and core. The measured 3He/ 4He ratio in Earth’s deep mantle is con-sidered evidence for the equilibration between a primordial atmosphere and this early magma ocean (Harper and Jacobsen, 1996). The dissolution of hydrogen into the magma ocean also changes its redox state as discussed in section 2.1.2. Furthermore, the sequestration of hydrogen into the interior has been proposed as a mechanism to explain the observed bulk densities of super-Earths (Schlichting and Young, 2022; Rogers et al, 2024b). Beyond simple dissolution, chemical reactions between the pri-mordial atmosphere and the magma ocean can further lead to an endogenic production of water with a D/H ratio of nebular gas (Ikoma and Genda, 2006; Ikoma et al, 2018). 

## 2.1.2 Secondary atmosphere 

Impact degassing 

When a planetary body collides, a shock wave is generated at the point of impact and propagates through the impactor and the rocks near the impact site. The compression caused by the shock wave is irreversible, increasing entropy and converting part of the impactor’s kinetic energy into heat. This shock heating induces phase transitions such as degassing, melting, and vaporization, and releases atmophile elements contained in solids (both the impactor and the target’s surface) directly into the atmosphere as gases. This process, known as impact degassing , is considered to have played an important role in shaping planetary atmospheres throughout planetary formation, from the continuous accretion stage of planetary embryos (Matsui and Abe, 1986; Tyburczy et al, 1986; Olson and Sharp, 2019; Salvador et al, 2023) to the late accretion phase on fully formed planets (Chyba, 1990; Sakuraba et al, 2019; Zahnle et al, 2020). The large number of craters preserved on the ancient surfaces of the Moon, Mercury and icy satellites attests the high frequency of collisions in the early solar system, suggesting that impact degassing played a significant role in the evolution of young terrestrial planets. The efficiency of impact degassing to devolatilize an accreting planetary body and form an atmosphere increases with the amount of accretion heating, which in turn is related to the size of the growing body and the size of the impactor. As a planet grows, the impact velocities increase due to the increase in radius until partial and then, at larger radii, complete devolatilization of especially water occurs. Water in minerals is released due to the resulting high temperatures. At what planetary radius devolatilization becomes effective also depends on the hydrated minerals, and estimates for complete volatilization range from 1300 km to 2500 km (e.g. Tyburczy et al, 2001). However, experiments have shown that up to 30% of volatiles can be stored in impact melts and projectile survivors (Daly and Schultz, 2018). Impact outgassing during accretion is particularly important, as this process determines how much of the volatiles — especially water — is trapped in the forming planet. This can then alter the atmosphere in later stages of magma ocean and volcanic outgassing. Once the volatile elements are released as gas, the gas composition in the hot vapor cloud in the initial phase is expected to be close to the chemical equilibrium 10 composition due to the high temperature. Chemical equilibrium calculations with bulk elemental abundances similar to those of primitive meteorites indicate that the redox state of iron (iron oxides v.s. metallic iron/iron sulfides) and the amount of atmophile elements are particularly important for the composition and redox state of impact-generated gases (Hashimoto et al, 2007; Schaefer and Fegley, 2007, 2010). The gas composition rapidly changes in accordance with the temperature and pressure changes associated with the vapor expansion, and eventually quenches at some point. The quenching conditions are determined by the cooling rate of an impact-induced vapor and the chemical reaction rates, and vary according to gas species. For instance, Zahnle et al (2020) used a thermochemical kinetics code to estimate that the quenching temperature of NH 3 is about 300 K higher than that of CH 4 for a Vesta-sized impact. In general, the quenching temperature tends to be lower as the size of an impact vapor cloud increases, due to a slower decrease in the internal temperature and pressure. Ancient Mars is the poster child for an atmosphere by impact degassing. Presently, Mars has a thin atmosphere with global yearly mean surface temperatures of ∼–65 C. However, there is ample geologic evidence that Mars in the Noachian eon ( > 3.7 Ga) had warm periods (whose length is still debated) where substantial water flowed on the surface (e.g. Wordsworth, 2016, and references therein). The seeds of the idea go back at least to Hashimoto et al (2007), who proposed that impact degassing could have contributed to Earth’s atmosphere toward the end of its accretion period, leading to an atmosphere that may have been mainly composed of impact material. Haberle et al (2019) proposed that a similar mechanism may have occurred on Mars, but in the post-accretion period. The theory is that the impactor creates a short-lived but hot thermal plume and that extant water on the surface of Mars interacts with the impactor’s reducing materials to produce H 2 (a powerful greenhouse gas). The authors estimated that if the impactor is >100 km in size, it could provide enough H2 for the planet’s mean global surface temperature to rise above 0 °C if it already has a dense CO 2 atmosphere. Earlier work by Wordsworth et al (2017) had shown using ab-initio calculations that CO 2–H 2 collisionally induced absorption (CIA) had previously been underestimated and could provide significant warming. Subsequent 3-D General Circulation Modeling (GCM) results confirmed that ∼10–20% H 2 in a 1–2 bar CO 2atmosphere could provide global and/or local surface temperatures above the freezing point in the Noachian and Hesperian eons (Kamada et al, 2020; Guzewich et al, 2021; Schmidt et al, 2022). However, more recent empirical work by Turbet et al (2020) has demonstrated that the CO 2–H 2 CIA ab-initio calculations of Wordsworth et al (2017) may be too optimistic and that the warming provided may be much less. Subsequent 3D GCM simulations by Schmidt et al (2025) confirm this. 

Magma ocean outgassing 

Magma ocean outgassing and solidification is an increasingly active field of research, as it rules the formation of both the initial secondary atmosphere and primordial reservoirs of volatile elements in the planetary mantle. Thus, it defines the starting point from which the secondary atmosphere and mantle reservoirs may evolve via enduring geodynamic processes. 11 Magma ocean outgassing is the process wherein the atmophile elements dissolved in magma oceans are exsolved to the surface, whereas when surficial gases are dissolved in the magma ocean, one talks about ingassing. In conditions where the exchange of materials between the atmosphere and the magma is most efficient, the mass and composition of the overlying atmosphere can be controlled by gas solubilities into silicate melts. An efficient exchange between the melt and the atmosphere occurs in particular during fractional crystallization. In this process, the heavier crystals sink and the lighter, more volatile melts rise and come into contact with the atmosphere through effective convection in the magma ocean, where the volatiles then exsolve or are ingassed (e.g., Nikolaou et al, 2019; Bower et al, 2022; Salvador and Samuel, 2023). In conditions of highly reducing surfaces, the atmosphere consists of H 2 and CO/CH 4, while N is dissolved in magma as nitrides, resulting in an atmosphere that is relatively N-depleted. Conversely, under oxidizing surface conditions, the predominant components are CO/CO 2 and N 2, while the majority of H is dissolved in magma as H2O, resulting in an atmosphere that is relatively H-depleted. So far, the effect of magma ocean oxidation (or redox) state on outgassing has mostly been considered as a free parameter, which arbitrarily varies between end-member cases, that is to say, from very reduced to very oxidized (Gaillard et al, 2022; Bower et al, 2022; Nicholls et al, 2024). Oxygen fugacity f O2 is a proxy that is used to quantify the redox state ( amount of oxygen) in the considered system and geochemists have used the iron-wustite (Fe-FeO, labelled IW) as a reference redox buffer. The most reduced systems have ∆IW-6, which indicates oxygen fugacity values that are 6 orders of magnitude lower than the f O2 imposed by the IW buffer. An example of such a reduced system is the mantle of present day Mercury. The most oxidized systems in contrast usually have ∆IW+6, e.g., subduction related magma on Earth. The provenance of planetary accretion materials, both capture and escape of H 2,and internal redox processes contribute to controlling the magma ocean redox state. The nature of the building blocks of planet accretion, pebble of chondritic origin, plan-etesimals and planetary embryos, is an obvious parameter controlling magma ocean fO2 . For example, in the solar system, a planet exclusively built from enstatite chon-drites should be more reduced, whereas a planet composed of carbonaceous chondrites should be much more oxidized. Similar types of building blocks, with equivalent redox differences, may be expected in other planetary systems (Doyle et al, 2019). Any intermediate magma ocean oxidation states can be attained by a mixture of these end-member materials. The disk processes controlling the provenance of these build-ing blocks (Morbidelli et al, 2015; Johansen et al, 2021) and what controls their redox state is much debated (Righter et al, 2020). Other processes, such as the gravitational capture of nebular gases, a process that has long been discussed in the literature for its consequences in terms of volatile abundances (see review by Ikoma et al, 2018) and its potential effect on the magma ocean oxidation state, remain little investigated (e.g., Young et al, 2023). In all cases, the capture of the solar nebula would raise the H 2/H 2Oratio and thus drive the system toward more reducing conditions. It remains to be studied what type of mineralogy assemblies and exotic speciation could be generated in the planetary interior due to the accretion of H2-dominated primordial atmospheres as is the case for sub-Neptunes. Alternatively, atmospheric escape processes tend to 12 favor H-loss, which should have the opposite effect, i.e., driving an increase in oxygen fugacity (Pierrehumbert, 2010a; Katyal et al, 2020). The effect of such escape processes on the magma ocean oxidation state has also been little addressed in a quantitative way. Internal oxygen redistribution, due to high pressures (> 15 GPa) prevailing deep in the magma ocean, can also affect the oxidation state of the magma ocean. Most identified processes, that is to say, iron disproportionation (Frost et al, 2004) and enhanced stability of ferric iron (Zhang et al, 2024), both favored by high-pressure, and silicon incorporation in the core, favored by high temperature, tend to cause an increase in the magma ocean oxygen fugacity. On the other hand, high temperature enhances the direct dissolution of oxygen in the metallic core, which causes a reduction of the oxygen fugacity of the magma ocean. All these processes are equilibrium processes. As such, they can be short-circuited in the chain of processes forming planets if non-equilibrium processes dominate. Magma ocean solidification also strongly influences the initial distribution of water and other volatiles in the interior. As a certain amount of water is partitioned into the solidifying minerals, an exponential increase of water in the crystals toward the surface can be expected in particular for fractional crystallization: since volatiles prefer to enter/remain in the melt, the rising melt becomes increasingly enriched with volatile elements as the magma ocean solidifies over time. As a result, the volatile content also increases in materials that crystallize later. The evolving magma ocean liquid is also continuously enriched in oxidized iron as Mg-rich silicates crystallize first. Therefore, Mg-rich cumulates can be found at the core-mantle boundary while Fe-rich cumulates form at the end of magma ocean solidification and remain close to the surface (Elkins-Tanton, 2012). This leads to a volatile and non-monotonic density increase toward the surface, resulting in a gravitationally unstable configuration, initiating early mantle convection and mixing the volatiles into the interior. As described above, fractional crystallization suggests efficient degassing. A deple-tion of more than 90% of the initial amount of volatiles has been assumed, and even small initial volatile contents (0.05 wt.% H 2O, 0.01 wt.% CO 2) can produce atmo-spheres in excess of 100 bars (Elkins-Tanton, 2008). However, fractional crystallization and degassing are disturbed among others by inefficient crystal-melt segregation, i.e., melt in which incompatible elements are concentrated can be confined in the solid cumulates. The faster the cooling and the slower the compaction, the less efficient is the crystal-melt separation (e.g., Solomatov, 2000; Hier-Majumder and Hirschmann, 2017). The melt fractions that are trapped in the cumulate pile have been estimated to values of between 1 and 10% (Elkins-Tanton, 2008; Hier-Majumder and Hirschmann, 2017). Furthermore, if the magma ocean did not comprise the entire mantle, the lower mantle remains primordial and thus more volatile-rich in comparison to the outgassed upper mantle due to magma ocean solidification (Gaillard et al, 2022). This means that a substantial amount of volatiles may still be present within planets after this early accretion and differentiation process. This water is then outgassed together with CO 2

and other volatiles during subsequent volcanism, as is described in the next section. The density of such an outgassed atmosphere (neglecting here condensation and atmospheric loss processes) can vary immensely depending on planetary mass, initial 13 volatile content of the outgassing magma ocean, and magma ocean redox state. As an example, Fig. 4 shows the maximum outgassed atmospheric pressure versus planet mass for initial volatile concentrations of 200 ppm CO 2, 200 ppm H 2O and 20 ppm N2 in the mantle. We consider here three different planetary interior structures (with a small metal core comparable to the Moon, with an Earth-like interior structure, and with a Mercury-like extremely large metal core) assuming either an oxidized magma ocean (solid lines, outgassed species are CO 2, H 2O and N 2, i.e., leading to a COHN-rich atmosphere), a reduced magma ocean (dashed lines, outgassed species considered here are CH 4, H 2 and NH 3) and an extremely reduced magma ocean where all C and N would remain stored in the mantle and only H 2 would be degassed (dotted lines). The planet mass and interior structure (e.g., core-mass fraction XCM F ) influence most importantly the mass of the rocky mantle and therefore the total mass of COHN volatiles that can maximally be outgassed, Matm ≈ Mp(1 − XCMF ), planet radius, 

Rp = (7030 − 1840 XCMF 

 Mp

MEarth 0.282 

,

and surface gravitational acceleration g0 ≈ M/R 2p ≈ M 0.436 p (Noack and Lasbleis, 2020). The resulting atmospheric pressure is then calculated via 

patm [bar ] = Matm g0

4πR 2p

10 −5

This simple rule-of-thumb calculation highlights that atmospheric pressures can vary by two orders of magnitude for the same planet mass but different interior config-uration: 1) Mercury-like planets would tend to have a factor 3 smaller atmospheric pressure due to the reduced proportion of (volatile-bearing) rocky material; 2) The planet mass impacts the atmospheric pressure by a factor of almost 9 when increas-ing mass by a factor of 10 (not taking into account solubility effects); and 3) oxidized magma oceans lead to much denser atmospheres, with atmospheric pressures almost five times higher compared to the reduced case and more than ten times higher compared to the extreme case scenario of only H 2 being outgassed. This simple estimate should of course be taken with caution and only be consid-ered for illustrative purposes to point out that magma ocean atmospheres may vary strongly in density and composition from planet to planet. This example also con-sidered extreme magma ocean redox state scenarios, and for many rocky planets, the atmospheric composition may lie in-between the oxidized and reduced scenarios. Fur-thermore, the redox state of the magma ocean may change over time due to interior differentiation processes (estimates for Earth suggest an increase of the mantle/magma ocean oxygen fugacity by several orders of magnitude during the accretion, core forma-tion, and magma ocean crystallization, Wood et al, 2006). In addition, outgassing of reduced gases such as H 2 may have further oxidized the magma ocean of early Earth, (Sharp et al, 2013). 14 Fig. 4 Rule-of-thumb estimates on maximal outgassed atmospheric pressure over planet mass con-sidering different planetary interior configurations. The initial volatile concentrations in the mantle are 200 ppm CO 2, 200 ppm H 2O and 20 ppm N 2. For more information, we refer the reader to the main text. 

Volcanic outgassing 

After the solidification of the magma ocean, volatile degassing continues through vol-canic activity. Volatiles such as carbon (C), hydrogen (H), oxygen (O), sulfur (S), and nitrogen (N) are stored within the rocks of the mantle and crust. Various geological processes, including heat transfer, decompression, and the introduction of water, can induce the melting of these rocks, leading to the release and partitioning of the stored volatiles into the melt. Being less dense than the surrounding rocks, the melt ascends through the mantle and crust, forming magma diapirs or utilizing fractures and cracks in the brittle crust to rise. As the magma ascends, the decreasing pressure reduces the solubility of dissolved volatiles and eventually leads to the formation of a gas phase when the magma becomes supersaturated. These gas bubbles are subsequently released into the atmosphere either through extrusive volcanism or, in cases where the melt is trapped, through cracks in the overlying rocks, driven by buoyant forces. The com-position of these gas bubbles varies depending on factors such as the volatile content of the melt, oxygen fugacity, temperature, and degassing pressure. Melts with high redox states predominantly degas H 2O, CO 2, N 2, and SO 2, whereas at lower redox states, volatiles such as H 2, CO, CH 4 (especially at high pressures), S 2, H 2S and NH 3

are more common (Gaillard and Scaillet, 2009, 2014). At low degassing (subaerial) pressures, sulfur is outgassed as SO 2, whereas at higher (submarine or subsurface) degassing pressures, sulfur is outgassed as H 2S, leading to different atmospheric com-positions for planetary surfaces covered by oceans compared to atmospheres formed predominantly by continental volcanism (Gaillard et al, 2011). 15 Additionally, degassing of halogens like HCl and HF is possible and while highly toxic (Giggenbach, 1996), they tend to play a less significant role on a global scale. Several studies have aimed to estimate variations in atmospheric composition, pres-sure, and temperature on exoplanets whose atmospheres are primarily formed through volcanic degassing. To accurately assess outgassing efficiency, key parameters such as the mantle’s volatile content, melting fluxes, and oxygen fugacity must be taken into account. Gaillard and Scaillet (2014) highlighted the critical role of pressure in control-ling the speciation of volcanic gases: within the pressure range of 50 to 500 bar, carbon species like CO 2 and CO dominate, while at pressures between 50 and 10 -3 bar, H 2Obecomes the most abundant species. At even lower pressures, sulfur-bearing gases pre-vail. Building on this, Ortenzi et al (2020) investigated the influence of mantle redox state and planetary size on atmospheric pressure. Their results show that planets with reduced interiors generate thinner atmospheres compared to those with oxidized inte-riors, due to the higher molecular weight of oxidized volatile species. Moreover, they found that volcanic degassing is most efficient on planets with masses between 2 and 4 Earth masses. This is attributed to greater volatile inventories, increased radiogenic heat production, and elevated mantle temperatures. However, for planets exceed-ing this threshold, higher lithospheric pressures raise melting temperatures, thereby inhibiting or even preventing volcanic outgassing. Woitke et al (2021) developed a simplified equilibrium chemistry model appli-cable to surface temperatures below 600 K, predicting three distinct compositional atmospheric types for cold terrestrial planets. These types are defined by the rela-tive abundances of four dominant gases: Type A atmospheres consist of NH 3, CH 4,H2O, and either H 2 or N 2; Type B feature O 2, H 2O, N 2, and CO 2; and Type C are characterized by H 2O, CO 2, CH 4, and N 2. Building on this framework, Brachmann et al (2025) extended the model by incorporating mantle volatile partitioning and vol-canic degassing. Their study revealed a strong dependence of atmospheric chemistry and pressure on mantle oxygen fugacity, surface temperature, and melt production rates. Mantles with oxygen fugacities below ∆IW +1 tend to produce thin, nitrogen-rich Type A atmospheres, while those with higher oxygen fugacities generate H 2O-or CO 2-dominated Type C atmospheres. Surface temperature further modulates gas abundances: H 2O and N 2 are more prevalent at higher temperatures, whereas NH 3 and CH 4 dominate under cooler conditions. Notably, Type B atmospheres cannot be gener-ated by volcanic degassing alone, as O 2 is neither directly released nor formed through equilibrium chemistry. Instead, abiotic O 2 formation requires photodissociation of H 2Omolecules. In a complementary study focused on hotter planets with surface temperatures above 800 K, Liggins et al (2022) introduced sulfur into the C-H-O-N system and iden-tified three atmospheric classes governed by mantle redox state. Class R atmospheres (oxygen fugacity < ∆IW +0.5) are dominated by H 2, CH 4, and NH 3; Class I atmo-spheres (oxygen fugacity between ∆IW +0.5 and +2.7) include CH 4, CO 2, CO, and COS; while Class O atmospheres (oxygen fugacity > ∆IW +2.7) are rich in SO 2, S 2O, and polymeric sulfur species (S x). It should be noted that the studies referenced here assume a homogeneous and temporally stable oxygen fugacity across a planet’s mantle, melt, and atmosphere. 16 However, this is a rough approximation. In reality, oxygen fugacity can vary between these different reservoirs and is influenced by a variety of processes. For example, the degassing of H 2 and CO may oxidize the melt, while sulfur degassing may reduce it (Burgisser and Scaillet, 2007; Gaillard and Scaillet, 2014). Additionally, atmospheric processes such as the photodissociation of H 2O and the subsequent escape of H 2 can oxidize the atmosphere (Sharp et al, 2013). The suggested atmosphere classifications therefore also depend on additional factors or processes not yet included, such as planetary composition, evolution of sur-face temperature under different weathering/condensation scenarios, and atmospheric losses depending among others on the host star. 

## 2.1.3 Current limitations in our understanding of planetary atmosphere formation 

Our understanding of planetary atmosphere formation is still constrained by significant approximations and assumptions that require rigorous reassessment. Several major limitations—both experimental and theoretical—persist, demanding focused attention to refine current models. The degassing and ingassing processes within magma oceans are currently described by solubility laws extrapolated to extreme temperatures and redox condi-tions, yet these extrapolations lack robust experimental or thermodynamic validation. While widely used by the scientific community, such extrapolations introduce uncer-tainties that remain difficult to quantify. Moreover, the very nature of species dissolving in magma oceans is not fully understood, particularly for compounds such as H 2, NH 3,and CH 4.Beyond internal chemistry, the coupling between the primordial and secondary atmospheres presents a modeling challenge. Recent models propose the emergence of hybrid atmospheres, formed by planetary outgassing into a primordial H 2-He enve-lope (Tian and Heng, 2024). The transition from primordial to secondary atmospheres has only recently been approached (Krissansen-Totton et al, 2024). The subsequent ingassing of this primordial atmosphere into the planetary interior — and its geochem-ical consequences — remains to be constrained. A more versatile modeling approach, capable of integrating exotic conditions beyond standard paradigms, is essential to capture these complex dynamics. The formation of the metallic core plays a critical role in shaping atmospheric composition through equilibration between the magma ocean and the metallic core. Many key atmophile elements — such as carbon, nitrogen, and hydrogen —also exhibit siderophile tendencies, complicating their partitioning between the core and the atmo-sphere (Gaillard et al, 2021). This duality necessitates finer modeling of distribution mechanisms during the evolution of the planet. While the assumption of equilibrium during ingassing and outgassing is conve-nient, it has been increasingly challenged (Walbecq et al, 2025). Non-equilibrium processes — such as bubble nucleation, volatile diffusion from melt to bubbles, and the balance between advection and convection in extreme magmatic conditions—require systematic study. Validating predictive equations under these high-pressure, high-temperature conditions remains a major experimental and theoretical challenge. 17 Planetary impacts represent another source of disequilibrium. They play a dual role in the evolution of the atmosphere by acting as volatile reservoirs and triggers for large-scale degassing, while at the same time potentially leading to partial or complete atmospheric loss. Despite their recognized importance, these stochastic events are not yet fully integrated into global models of atmospheric formation. Finally, the solidification of magma oceans and associated degassing form a com-plex dynamic system, where internal convection and external radiation interact. Degassing influences the solidification process, which in turn affects convection rates and cooling rates, while solidification itself impacts degassing, creating feedback loops that remain poorly characterized. Additionally, the interplay between stellar irradia-tion and the nature of the outgassed atmosphere may lead to divergent evolutionary pathways (Hamano et al, 2013). Thus, magma ocean solidification, degassing, atmo-sphere formation, and stellar irradiation are deeply intermingled processes whose interdependencies require further elucidation. 

# 2.2 Escape 

In general, thermal atmospheric escape occurs when the kinetic energy of gas particles in the upper atmosphere exceeds the gravitational binding energy of the planet. The upper atmosphere typically refers to either the region above the homopause or above the mesopause. In the heterosphere, above the homopause, the different atmospheric species are no longer mixed, leading to a stratification by mass. The region above the mesopause is characterized by a positive thermal gradient with altitude. The two boundaries are typically located close to each other. The height of the mesopause on both Earth and Venus is at ≈ 100 km, for exoplanets, the boundary between inner and upper atmosphere is 5 − 25 % bigger than the transit radius (Kite and Barnett, 2020; Malsky and Rogers, 2020). Several physical processes can contribute to increasing the energy of the atmo-spheric particles. This section serves as a brief summary of important mass loss mechanisms. For a detailed discussion on atmospheric escape, we refer the reader to Kubyshkina et al (2026, this Topical collection). 

## 2.2.1 Thermal escape processes 

In the case of thermal mass loss, the heating of the planetary atmosphere by external or internal sources drives the escape of the atmosphere. We distinguish two different regimes of thermal escape. In Jeans escape, the upper atmosphere is in hydrostatic equilibrium, and the fraction of the escaping particles corresponds to the high-energy tail of a Maxwell distribution (Jeans, 1955; Chamberlain, 1963). For strong heating, the upper atmosphere is no longer in hydrostatic equilibrium. The resulting expansion of the atmosphere leads to a bulk outflow of atmospheric gas similar to solar Parker winds (Parker, 1965). In contrast to Jeans escape, the outflowing gas remains a collisional fluid. This regime is referred to as hydrodynamic escape. The transition between Jeans and hydrodynamic escape typically takes place when the kinetic energy is the same or greater than the gravitational binding energy of the planet. 18 The heating source plays an important role in shaping the mass loss rate and the final structure of the planet. In the following, we discuss the two common heating sources for thermal escape. 

Boil-off and core-powered mass loss 

Both in the so-called boil-off and core-powered mass loss, the main drivers of the mass loss are the thermal energy reservoir of the planet and the stellar bolometric irradiation 1 (e.g., Ginzburg et al, 2016; Owen and Wu, 2016; Tang et al, 2024). The stellar irradiation heats the atmosphere from above at the same time as the heat flux from the solid planet heats the atmosphere from below. While the planet is embedded in the disk, the pressure support from the sur-rounding protoplanetary disk and the solid accretion luminosity allow the primordial atmosphere of the planet to be extended out to its Bondi radius (e.g., Pollack et al, 1996; Ikoma et al, 2000; Piso and Youdin, 2014; Stökl et al, 2015). Owen and Wu (2016) find that the atmospheres of low-mass planets remain inflated after the disk disperses, as the cooling time of the atmosphere is longer than the timescale of the disk dispersal. The resulting loss of hydrostatic equilibrium establishes a bulk outflow of atmospheric gas in the form of a hydrodynamic wind (Owen and Wu, 2016; Ginzburg et al, 2016). Boil-off ends when the mass loss timescale becomes shorter than the cooling timescale of the planet (Rogers et al, 2024a; Tang et al, 2024). The typical timescale of boil-off is on the order of a few Myrs, making it a very fast loss process (Owen and Wu, 2016; Tang et al, 2024; Rogers et al, 2024a). The remaining mass fraction depends on the solid planet mass and the strength of the irradiation (Owen and Wu, 2016; Tang et al, 2024). Models show that boil-off can strip the total primordial atmo-sphere of planets with Mp ⪅ 5 M⊕ that receive a flux of F ≳ 100 F⊕ (Fossati et al, 2017; Tang et al, 2024). The combination of the thermal energy of the solid planet and the bolometric irradiation from the host star continues to drive atmospheric escape over a timescale of Gyrs. This type of atmospheric escape is known as core-powered mass loss. However, most works on the role of core-powered mass loss on the evolution of planets have used a simplified analytical model based on Ginzburg et al (2018). Recent numerical models by Tang et al (2024) find that the analytical model overestimates the mass loss due to core-powered mass loss. Further work by Misener et al (2025) finds that the mass loss rate depends significantly on the ratio of the opacity in the visible and infrared wavelength range. Therefore, boil-off and core-powered mass loss likely only play a role for planets with primordial atmospheres. 

Photoevaporation 

Photoevaporation refers to the hydrodynamic escape of the upper atmosphere driven by the EUV and X-ray (XUV) irradiation received from the host star (e.g., Lopez et al, 2012; Stökl et al, 2014; Owen and Jackson, 2012; Owen and Wu, 2013). The XUV irra-diation heats the upper atmosphere via dissociation and ionization of gas molecules. As the XUV luminosity is especially high for young stars (Ribas et al, 2005; Johnstone 

> 1Meaning the irradiation across all wavelengths-.

19 et al, 2021a; Kubyshkina et al, 2026, this Topical collection), photoevaporation plays a significant role in the loss of the primordial and magma ocean outgassed atmosphere in the first ∼ 100 Myr (e.g., Gillmann et al, 2009; Owen and Wu, 2017; Lammer et al, 2018). Photoevaporation can lead to a complete loss of the primordial atmosphere of rocky planets if the initial mass-loss timescale tloss = Matm / ˙Matm is shorter than the phase of high XUV output from the star (Owen and Wu, 2017). For close-in planets at roughly 

0.1 AU, this is the case for planets up to 6 M⊕ (Owen and Wu, 2013; Mordasini, 2020). The duration of the phase with high XUV output, also referred to as the saturation phase of the star, decreases with increasing stellar mass (Jackson et al, 2012; Shkolnik and Barman, 2014; McDonald et al, 2019; Johnstone et al, 2021a). In addition, for a given equilibrium temperature planets orbiting young M dwarfs receive a higher XUV flux compared to planets orbiting FGK stars as they are on shorter orbits (Johnstone et al, 2021a). Consequently, photoevaporation is more efficient around low-mass stars. Rocky planets around M dwarfs are therefore less likely to retain atmospheres than planets around more massive stars. Modeling the variety of physical and chemical processes influencing the escape rates due to photoevaporation is computationally expansive, which is why the escape rates are often estimated using the energy-limited approximation (Watson et al, 1981; Erkaev et al, 2007), i.e., 

˙Matm = η πR 2XUV Rpl 

4πGM pl K , (3) where G is the gravitational constant, ˙Matm is the atmospheric mass loss rate, FXUV 

is the stellar XUV surface flux at the planet, RXUV is the effective radius where 

FXUV is absorbed in the atmosphere, Rpl and Mpl are the planetary radius and mass, respectively, and K accounts for Roche-lobe effects. The heating efficiency, η, is the fraction of the absorbed XUV surface flux that goes into heating. Besides atmospheric type (see below) and local conditions, it depends on the spectral energy distribution (SED) of the XUV flux, whereby a harder SED leads to an increased value for η

(Linsky, 2025). This implies that active young K and G stars, rapidly rotating stars, and active M dwarfs induce higher η-values. In addition, η depends on a planet’s gravitational potential. Exoplanets with higher gravities have smaller atmospheric scale heights, implying an absorption of the XUV flux at lower atmospheric densities and a smaller value for η (Salz et al, 2016; Linsky, 2025). In total, η may vary between roughly 1% and 20% for hydrogen-rich atmo-spheres (e.g., Shematovich et al, 2014; Salz et al, 2016). For secondary atmospheres, however, heating becomes more complex and depends on various additional factors such as the net energy expanse of the various photochemical reactions and radiative cooling of additional cooling agents such as CO 2 or CO in CO 2-dominated atmospheres (e.g., Johnstone et al, 2018; Yoshida et al, 2022; Van Looveren et al, 2025) and atomic line cooling via oxygen in N 2-O 2-dominated atmospheres (Nakayama et al, 2022). In the energy-limited approach, the mass loss rate is determined by the ratio of the incoming irradiation and the gravitational binding energy of the planet. However, it has been shown that the energy-limited formula overestimates the escape rate for close-in hydrogen-dominated, highly-irradiated low-mass planets, whereas it underestimates 20 the escape rate for cool planets with more compact atmospheres (Erkaev et al, 2016; Owen and Mohanty, 2016). One solution to overcome this is to use pre-calculated grids based on hydrodynamical models (e.g., Kubyshkina et al, 2018). 

## 2.2.2 Non-thermal mass loss 

In the upper atmosphere of terrestrial exoplanets, collisions become less frequent, and the suprathermal component in the velocity distribution can contribute to atmo-spheric escape. Two major drivers of non-thermal atmospheric escape are the stellar XUV irradiation and stellar wind. Non-thermal escape mechanisms are categorized into collisional non-thermal escape and stellar wind-induced escape. Photochemical escape and charge exchange (energetic neutral atom production exceeding escape velocity) are major collisional non-thermal escape mechanisms. Stellar wind-induced escape includes ion pickup, atmospheric sputtering, and cold ionospheric outflows (plasma instabilities) for unmagnetized planets, as well as polar wind, auroral out-flows, and plasmaspheric drainage plumes for magnetized planets (see Table 2 in Kubyshkina et al, 2026, this Topical collection). The relative importance of these mechanisms depends on planetary conditions, such as atmospheric composition and intrinsic magnetic field. On Earth-like or heavier planets, where gravitational escape velocity is considerable (11 .2 km/s for Earth), thermal escape primarily concerns hydrogen. Heavier species like oxygen, carbon, and nitrogen need to be accelerated to reach escape velocities via non-thermal escape processes. Atmospheric escape of these heavier species, which often constitute a major part of the secondary planetary atmosphere of rocky planets, mainly occurs as ion escape. Neutral atoms or molecules in the upper atmosphere can be ionized by stellar XUV irradiation, charge exchange interactions, or electron impact. Various processes supply planetary ions to the magnetospheres (e.g., Seki et al, 2015, and references therein). For magnetized planets like Earth, ion escape primarily occurs from the polar ionosphere, corresponding to latitudes higher than the subauroral regions (e.g., Abe et al, 1993; Seki et al, 2001; Yau et al, 2007). Planetary ions outflowing from the polar ionosphere undergo various acceleration and transport in the magnetosphere, with a significant part eventually escaping to the interplanetary space (e.g., Gronoff et al, 2020). Some ions, despite having energies above the escape energy, return to the planetary atmosphere due to magnetospheric convection and plasma processes such as pitch angle scattering by wave-particle interactions. Other escape mechanisms include plasmaspheric drainage plume and ENA production by charge exchange (e.g., Keika et al, 2006; Gronoff et al, 2020, and references therein). For unmagnetized planets, the stellar wind can interact directly with the plane-tary upper atmosphere. In addition to Jeans escape (thermal escape), photochemical escape, which we will briefly address in the context of an upper atmosphere’s photo-chemistry in Section 5, can be an important mechanism for neutral atmospheric escape (e.g., Amerstorfer et al, 2017; Lillis et al, 2017a). The relative importance of neutral escape compared to ion escape depends on stellar XUV irradiation and planetary mass. As planetary mass increases, the relative importance of ion escape to neutral escape generally becomes higher due to the large escape energy. Major ion escape mechanisms 21 from unmagnetized planets include ion pickup including polar plumes (Curry et al, 2015; Sakakura et al, 2022), atmospheric sputtering (Luhmann and Kozyra, 1991), and cold ionospheric outflows (Inui et al, 2019). The cold ionospheric outflow involves various plasma processes causing ion acceleration/heating. Detailed description about the non-thermal escape processes and related observables can be found in Kubyshkina et al (2026, this Topical collection). 

## 2.2.3 Stripping by giant impacts 

Giant impacts induce a strong shock wave that propagates through the impactor and the target planet, thereby inducing a global ground motion over them. The atmosphere overlying the surface gains momentum from the ground motion, and, if the propagat-ing shock wave is sufficiently strong, it escapes from the planet on a global scale (e.g. Chen and Ahrens, 1997). One-dimensional hydrodynamic simulations indicate that the loss efficiency by this mechanical process is strongly dependent on pre-impact sur-face conditions, specifically in the presence or absence of an ocean (Genda and Abe, 2005; Schlichting et al, 2015; Lock and Stewart, 2024). Owing to the different shock impedances between the rock, water and gas, the velocity of the ocean surface becomes higher than that of the rock surface without an ocean. As a result, the presence of an ocean enhances the loss efficiency of the planetary atmosphere significantly. For exam-ple, on an Earth-mass planet with a 1 bar H 2 atmosphere, in the absence of an ocean, the ground velocity would need to be greater than the escape velocity to completely remove the atmosphere. However, if there is a 3 km deep ocean, the atmosphere could be completely stripped away with a ground velocity of about 40% of the escape velocity (Lock and Stewart, 2024). The effect of oceans in enhancing atmospheric loss becomes stronger as the ocean-to-atmosphere mass ratio increases. In comparison to the sur-face conditions, the effects of other parameters such as atmospheric composition and surface temperature are relatively minor. Quantifying the efficiency of atmospheric loss caused by giant impacts has been attempted by means of 3D SPH (smoothed par-ticle hydrodynamics) simulations (e.g. Kegerreis et al, 2020). However, this remains challenging due to difficulties in resolving the crust, atmosphere and ocean accurately. In the aftermath of giant impacts, the planetary surface becomes extremely hot through the propagation of the strong shock wave and the re-accretion of the ejected material. Consequently, a high-temperature (exceeding several thousand Kelvins) mixed atmosphere would form on the post-impact surface, consisting of the remaining volatile elements and the partially vaporized silicates. The extremely hot atmosphere may expand against the planet’s gravity and escape hydrodynamically into space. Biersteker and Schlichting (2021) considered that thermal radiation from the lower atmosphere drives hydrodynamic escape and estimated the associated energy-limited mass loss rate. They found that planets with masses that are less than half of the Earth’s mass are capable of losing their H-He dominated atmospheres, as long as the mean molar weight remains sufficiently low, even in the presence of vaporized sili-cate. As other heavier gas species increase, the mass loss rate decreases rapidly with increasing mean molecular weight. A more precise estimation of the mass loss rate would require hydrodynamic calculations that account for the detailed structure and energy budget of escaping atmospheres. 22 2.3 Observational features of escape 

## 2.3.1 Present-day Solar System 

While there is evidence that the terrestrial planets have undergone significant thermal mass loss in the past (see Section 2.4), it only plays a minor role at the present day and is limited to the lightest element, hydrogen (Lammer et al, 2006; Jakosky et al, 2018). Instead, the dominating escape processes for the terrestrial planets in the Solar System at present-day are non-thermal processes, such as the escape of ionized species and photochemical escape. Below we will summarize some key observations of these escape mechanisms; for more details, see, e.g., Chappell (2015); Ramstad et al (2018); Scherf and Lammer (2021); Gillmann et al (2022); Kubyshkina et al (2026, this topical collection). Atmospheric escape at Venus is dominated by ion escape for oxygen and carbon, and by photochemical escape for hydrogen. Ions with a sufficient energy to gain escape velocity are produced either in Venus’ exosphere and ionosphere via the Sun’s XUV irradiation and are then accelerated by the solar wind or ionospheric electric fields (e.g., Hartle and Grebowsky, 1990; Luhmann et al, 2004; Slapak et al, 2017). Escaping ions were, for instance, observed with the ion mass analyzer (IMA) of the ASPERA-4 instrument onboard Venus Express (VEX), see, e.g., Barabash et al (2007), Fedorov et al (2011), and Persson et al (2018). Observations between 2006 and 2014 in the induced magnetotail of Venus yielded escape rates for O + and H + of ∼ 2.9 × 10 24 s−1

and ∼ 7.6 × 10 24 s−1, respectively, for solar minimum and somewhat lower values for solar maximum due to an increase of the proton return flux toward the planet during solar maximum (see, Persson et al, 2018, for details). However, the ion mass analyzer onboard VEX was only able to distinguish H +, He +, and heavy ions (e.g., C + and O+) from each other, implying that the derived O + escape rate prescribes the total ion escape of all heavy ions added together (Persson et al, 2018). Recently, however, measurements with the Mass Spectrum Analyzer onboard Bepi-Colombo while flying by Venus indicate the C + to O + ratio to be up to ∼0.3 (Hadid et al, 2024). Whereas ion loss is the only significant source of escape into space for O, photo-chemical escape provides the dominant sink for hydrogen on Venus (Lammer et al, 2006; Chaffin et al, 2024, see also Section 5 for details). Energetic photochemical reac-tions for both species, however, produce hot coronae, i.e., exospheric suprathermal particles around Venus, that can be observed in Ly-α. Its hydrogen corona was already observed by Mariner 5 (Anderson, 1976) and later by the Venera missions (Bertaux et al, 1978, 1982), the Pioneer Venus Orbiter (PVO) (Cravens et al, 1980) and VEX (Chaufray et al, 2012). Its structure can be approximated via a two component model consistent of a cold, thermal and a hot, non-thermal component (e.g., Chaufray et al, 2012) from which thermal and photochemical escape rates can be estimated, which are of the order of 10 19 and 4 × 10 25 s−1 (e.g., Lammer et al, 2006), respectively. Recently, Weichbold et al (2025) analyzed ion cyclotron wave observations by VEX in Venus’ exosphere and were able to derive photochemical escape rates for H and, for the first time, D. For hydrogen, their derived value of ∼ 4 × 10 25 s−1 is in agreement with Monte Carlo simulations (Lammer et al, 2006; Chaffin et al, 2024) and it highlights that photochemical escape is indeed the major source of H escape on Venus with loss 23 rates being almost an order of magnitude higher than non-thermal H + escape (Pers-son et al, 2018). Oxygen, on the other hand, whose hot corona was for the first time observed with the UV spectrometer onboard PVO (Nagy et al, 1981), is too heavy to escape photochemically (see Section 5). The energy that oxygen obtains from the dis-sociative recombination of O 2+ (i.e., ≤6.96 eV; e.g., Kim et al, 1998) is smaller than the relatively high escape energy at Venus’ exobase (i.e., ∼8.6 eV as calculated through the gravitational potential); see also Section 5. On Earth – the only terrestrial planet in the solar system that hosts both a collision-dominated atmosphere and an intrinsic magnetic field – atmospheric escape is dominated via ion outflow along the open field lines of its polar ovals. Observa-tions of the so-called polar wind, whereby atmospheric ions are accelerated upwards from the ionosphere along the magnetic field lines due to the charge separation elec-tric field present in the ionosphere (Chappell, 2015), date back to the late 1960s and early 1970s when H +, He +, and O + were for the first time observed to flow upwards from the ionosphere into the magnetosphere (Shelley et al, 1972; Sharp et al, 1977; Chappell, 2015). Various thermospheric, exospheric and magnetospheric missions col-lected data of the Earth’s plasma environment since then (see, e.g., Dandouras et al, 2020, for an overview), and it was, for example, found through high-altitude space-craft observations that only around 10% of the upflowing O + is indeed escaping via open field lines with the rest flowing back toward the Earth; a complex process that leads to a total upper limit for the O + escape rate of ∼ 5 × 10 25 (Seki et al, 2001). More recent observational studies found a positive correlation of the O + loss on the solar wind dynamic pressure (Haaland et al, 2012; Schillings et al, 2019), as well as a significant increase of the escape during geomagnetic storms (Haaland et al, 2012); extreme solar conditions therefore seem to be able to push O + outflow rates beyond 

10 26 (e.g., Haaland et al, 2012; Wei et al, 2012; Schillings et al, 2019). N + escape rates, on the other hand, are typically observed to be an order of magnitude lower than the O+ escape rates (Lin et al, 2020). Other escape channels at the Earth are typically negligible, except H escape, which predominantly stems from photochemical reactions in the thermosphere. As is the case for Venus and Mars, Earth’s hydrogen corona can be mapped via Ly-α observations, e.g., with the Solar Wind Anisotropies instrument onboard the Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SWAN/SOHO) from which the loss rate of H can be estimated. This was found to be in the order of 10 26 s−1, which – if it were constant through geological history – would remove around 1 meter of the terrestrial ocean into space over billion-year timescales (Baliukin et al, 2019). However, H escape toward the past has most likely been increasingly higher, specifically during the Archean and Hadean eons (e.g., Lammer et al, 2018). Another method to map Earth’s extended H corona is to observe energetic neutral atoms (ENAs), e.g., with the Interstellar Boundary Explorer (IBEX) spacecraft, which are produced through charge exchange between exospheric hydrogen and shocked solar wind protons, predominantly at the subsolar magnetopause (Fuselier et al, 2010). This charge exchange process further generates X-rays planned to be observed by the Soft X-ray Imager (SXI) onboard the SMILE mission (Sembay et al, 2025). 24 For Mars – the smallest of the three planets with a collision-dominated atmosphere – atmospheric escape is more diverse. Whereas photochemical reactions are the dom-inant loss channels for nitrogen, oxygen, and likely carbon, it is thermal escape for H and sputtering for heavier species. For oxygen, photochemistry is primarily driven by the dissociative recombination of O 2+ and CO 2+ (Gronoff et al, 2020, see also Section 5). Theoretical models, however, predict that not all the oxygen atoms will gain sufficient energy to escape but will form a corona of hot oxygen surrounding the planet (Wallis, 1978; Amerstorfer et al, 2017). This corona was observed by the Mars Atmosphere and Volatile Evolution mission by measuring the O I 130.4 nm triplet fea-ture (Deighan et al, 2015; Chirakkil et al, 2024) with escape rates being derived to be in the order of 10 25 (Deighan et al, 2015), i.e., comparable to O escape rates on Venus and Earth. For N, the dominant production channels are the photodissociation of N 2 and the dissociative recombination of N 2+ (e.g., Fox and Dalgarno, 1980; Cui, J. et al, 2019). Based on simultaneously modeling photochemical reactions and MAVEN observations of N 2 and N 2+ profiles, the photochemical escape rate of nitrogen was derived to be slightly below 10 25 s−1 (Cui, J. et al, 2019). Also for H, photochemical reactions provide an important escape channel, but, based on Ly-α observations of the Martian H corona with HST, this is only as high as roughly 30% of the thermal H escape rate of ∼ 10 26 s−1 (Bhattacharyya et al, 2023). Here, the radiative dissociation of HCO +

provides the major photochemical loss reaction (Gregory et al, 2023). Photochemical escape further played an important role during the Martian his-tory. The radiative dissociation of N 2+ is likely responsible for the strong atmospheric fractionation of 14 N/ 15 N (Fox and Hać, 1997), C, and even O (e.g., Lillis et al, 2017b; Amerstorfer et al, 2017). Photochemical escape could have led to an integrated loss of CO 2 from Mars during the last 4 Gyr of about 200 mbar (Amerstorfer et al, 2017), making it, together with ion escape, the most important CO 2 loss mechanism (Licht-enegger et al, 2022). For the first 500 Myr of the Martian evolution, however, thermal escape was the dominant driver of atmospheric escape (Scherf and Lammer, 2021). Sputtering is another relevant loss process from the Martian atmosphere that was until recently only observed indirectly, e.g., via measuring the precipitation of plane-tary heavy pickup ions onto the atmosphere, which subsequently sputter other particles into space (e.g., Leblanc et al, 2015, 2018). Recently, however, first direct observations of sputtered argon at Mars were successfully attained with MAVEN by correlating Ar densities with the solar wind motional electric field, thereby deriving Ar sputter rates to be around 2 × 10 23 s−1, a value that is in agreement with the higher end of mod-eled sputtering rates (Lichtenegger et al, 2022). Although sputtering only contributes relatively minor loss rates compared to other species and escape channels, it is the dom-inant loss mechanism for species heavier than O and can provide important insights for reconstructing atmospheric losses on Mars over time since it preferentially removes lighter isotopes from the atmosphere, i.e., 36 Ar compared to 38 Ar in this specific case (Jakosky et al, 2018; Lichtenegger et al, 2022). A final important loss channel on Mars is heavy ion escape (i.e., C, N and O ions), which was measured by Mars Express (e.g., Lundin et al, 2013) and MAVEN (Brain et al, 2015), and can exceed ∼ 10 25 s−1

during high solar activity (Ledvina et al, 2017). Observations have further shown that 25 the plasma structure around Mars is dominated by tailward outflows of ions (Nilsson et al, 2012; Inui et al, 2019) and a permanent northern polar plume made of energetic ions that contributes more than 20% to the total heavy ion escape (Dong et al, 2015). Besides the aforementioned planets, one may also mention Titan with its dense N2-dominated atmosphere. The Ion and Neutral Mass Spectrometer onboard Cassini, for instance, observed a suprathermal corona around the satellite, through which suprathermal escape rates for N and CH 4 were estimated to be, again, in the order of 

10 25 s−1 (De La Haye et al, 2007). Sputtering, specifically induced by energetic parti-cles in Saturn’s magnetosphere, is another significant escape channel with loss rates in the order of 10 25 s−1, whereas ion escape and particularly thermal escape are compar-atively insignificant, mostly due to the low XUV surface flux received from the distant Sun (see, e.g., Erkaev et al, 2021, for an overview on atmospheric escape at Titan). As one can see from this summary, the loss rates from Venus, Earth, Mars, and even Titan are roughly on the same order of magnitude. This seems to be relatively surprising as it was initially thought that a planetary magnetic field would protect the atmosphere from escape by interaction with the stellar wind. Its protective role, therefore, remains highly debated (Ramstad et al, 2018; Ramstad and Barabash, 2021; Way et al, 2023). While the diversion of energy from the stellar wind energy by a mag-netic field protects the atmosphere from sputtering and ion pickup, the magnetosphere increases the interaction region between stellar wind and the planet, thus leading to a higher amount of transferred energy (Gunell et al, 2018). In addition, one can see that photochemical escape plays a crucial role for various species on all of these planets, a process whose efficiency is not necessarily diminished by an intrinsic magnetic field. Whether a magnetic field can provide shielding for present-day conditions and, even more so, for more intense solar/stellar plasma and radiation environments remains unknown. 

## 2.3.2 Exoplanets 

In the case of exoplanets, the outflow of gas from the atmosphere can in principle be seen through wavelength-dependent signatures in the transit spectrum of a planet (e.g., Dos Santos, 2023). The first such observation was the detection of escaping H from the hot Jupiter HD 209458 b (Vidal-Madjar et al, 2003; Ehrenreich et al, 2008). Since then, outflow of H has been detected in a number of planets including sub-Neptune-sized planets such as HD 63433 (Zhang et al, 2022; Dos Santos, 2023). The escape of heavier elements such as carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen can be probed in the UV wavelength regime. However, these metal lines are typically very weak and have only been observed in hot Jupiters so far (e.g., Linsky et al, 2010; Schlawin et al, 2010; Dos Santos, 2023). The UV spectroscopy capability of the upcoming HWO, however, will enable the study of atmospheric escape across a wide range of planets including cool sub-Neptunes (Dos Santos et al, 2025). A promising observational probe of atmospheric escape is the helium triplet located at 1.083 μm. This line is observable both in transmission spectroscopy and at high spectral resolution with ground-based facilities (e.g., Allart et al, 2018; Vissapragada et al, 2020; Kirk et al, 2022; Zhang et al, 2023). 26 We can further study atmospheric escape by examining its impact on the exoplanet population as a whole. One of the most significant results of the Kepler mission is the detection of the so-called radius valley or radius gap, which refers to a lack of planets with radii between 1.5 to 2.0 R⊕ (e.g., Fulton et al, 2017; Van Eylen et al, 2018; Fulton and Petigura, 2018; Berger et al, 2020; Ho and Van Eylen, 2023). This bimodal distribution in planet size was actually predicted by theoretical mod-els of photoevaporation previous to its detection (Owen and Wu, 2013). According to photoevaporation models, planets below and above the gap are part of the same population of planets with Earth-like interiors that are initially surrounded by a large primordial atmosphere. After formation, these planets undergo significant thermal mass loss. Depending on their total mass, planets will either lose their entire atmo-sphere turning into super-Earths located below the radius gap or retain a fraction of the initial atmosphere, becoming sub-Neptunes located above the gap. Numerous stud-ies have demonstrated that atmospheric escape processes described in section 2.2.1 can explain the observed features of the radius gap, such as its dependence on the orbital period and stellar mass (e.g., Owen and Wu, 2017; Jin and Mordasini, 2018; Gupta and Schlichting, 2019; Rogers et al, 2021). However, the radius gap can also be explained by two distinct planet compositions. In this picture, planets below the radius gap have a composition similar to Earth, while planets above the radius gap can contain up to 50 wt.% water (e.g., Venturini et al, 2020; Luque and Pallé, 2022; Burn et al, 2024). Although most models assume that super-Earths have undergone atmospheric escape, it is also possible that these planets formed without ever accreting a primordial atmosphere in the first place (Lee and Connors, 2021; Lee et al, 2022; Nielsen et al, 2025). One strategy for testing the two competing scenarios, atmospheric escape and water-rich formation, observationally involves multi-planet systems that straddle the radius gap. If the mass and radius are known for both planets, one can then test if the system architecture is consistent with predictions from atmospheric escape models or not (e.g., Owen and Campos Estrada, 2020; Egger et al, 2024; Lockley et al, 2025) This will require a large sample of small-sized planets with precise mass and radius measurements (Lacedelli et al, 2024). The upcoming PLATO mission is expected to discover a vast number of multi-planet systems (Rauer et al, 2025). Thanks to the planned radial velocity follow-up observations to obtain mass measurements, the PLATO sample will thus allow a more detailed characterization of the radius valley. Planets situated directly within the radius valley such as TOI-544 b (Osborne et al, 2024) are of particular interest. Confirmation that the radius gap is caused by atmo-spheric escape implies that rocky planets typically accrete a primordial atmosphere. The potential influence of such an atmosphere on the long-term evolution of rocky planets, e.g., through interactions with the magma ocean, thus needs to be studied. 

# 2.4 Effect of atmospheric loss on the evolution of rocky planets 

In the most extreme case, atmospheric escape can lead to the total erosion of the atmosphere, leaving behind a bare rock. This might be the case for close-in rocky planets around M-dwarfs (e.g. Van Looveren et al, 2025). Even in a less extreme sce-nario, atmospheric escape may drastically transform the composition of an accreted 27 or outgassed atmosphere. Luger and Barnes (2015) suggested that it is possible to transform a sub-Neptune type planet into a rocky planet residing in the habitable zone. Tian et al (2014); Luger and Barnes (2015); Meadows (2017) suggested that planets orbiting early phase M-dwarfs or planets in a runaway greenhouse state could become strongly oxygen-rich over time, due to photodissociation and subsequent loss of hydrogen. Carone et al (2025) extended these studies by including CO 2 in the magma ocean atmosphere, and found that the build-up of free O 2 in the atmosphere is, to some extent, possible by atmospheric erosion. Cherubim et al (2025) show that the dissolution of water in the molten mantle shields the oxygen from escape (by lim-iting the amount of water in the atmosphere). Later water mantle outgassing can lead to oxidized secondary atmospheres (e.g. Luger and Barnes, 2015; Meadows, 2017). This suggested oxidation of the atmosphere by erosion of reducing gases (especially of hydrogen) also fits the observations from the solar system (see also further down), where Mars shows a thin but CO 2-dominated atmosphere, whereas theoretical pre-dictions would suggest a more reduced outgassed atmosphere (Gaillard and Scaillet, 2009). For a high enough escape rate, hydrogen can drag along heavier elements (Zahnle and Kasting, 1986; Hunten et al, 1987; Odert et al, 2018). This can lead to a loss of moderately volatile rock-forming elements on Mars-sized planetary embryos, altering their Fe/Mg and Si/Fe ratios compared to their host star (Benedikt et al, 2020). More importantly, atmospheric escape can modify the abundance of the radioactive isotope 40 K, which is an important constraint on the tectonic evolution of a rocky planet (Benedikt et al, 2020; Erkaev et al, 2023). For small, rocky planets on ultra-short orbits, the temperature on the dayside sur-face is hot enough to vaporize the planet (e.g., Kite et al, 2016; Zilinskas et al, 2022; Curry et al, 2024). The evaporated rocky material then escapes into space through thermally driven winds (Perez-Becker and Chiang, 2013). The mass loss rates are high enough to result in disintegration lifetimes down to a few hundred Myr (Perez-Becker and Chiang, 2013). To this date, four such planets have been found observed through asymmetric transit profiles and time-variable transit depths caused by comet-like tails formed by large dust grains: Kepler-1520 b (Rappaport et al, 2012), KOI-2700 b (Rap-paport et al, 2014), K2-22 b (Sanchis-Ojeda et al, 2015), and BD+05 4868 Ab (Hon et al, 2025). These planets offer a unique opportunity to directly probe the interior of rocky planets (Curry et al, 2025). The strength of a past atmospheric loss can also be estimated from the fractiona-tion of different isotopic pairs in the remaining atmosphere, most prominently for the deuterium to hydrogen ratio. In the case of Venus and Mars, it implies high losses of hydrogen (be it from H 2 or CH 4 in the atmosphere, H 2O steam, or liquid, evapo-rated water oceans). Other isotopic fractionation patterns can be observed as well, for example for xenon, carbon, nitrogen and argon (Zahnle et al, 2019; Gillmann et al, 2011; Lammer et al, 2020). The 36 Ar/ 38 Ar and 20 Ne/ 22 Ne isotope ratios of the Earth and Venus are comparable to solar ratios (Porcelli and Pepin, 2000; Porcelli et al, 2001; Yokochi and Marty, 2004; Gillmann et al, 2009; Mukhopadhyay, 2012; Odert et al, 2018; Williams and Mukhopadhyay, 2019). These isotope ratios are seen as evi-dence that proto-Venus and proto-Earth have captured a H 2-dominated atmosphere 28 (e.g., Mizuno et al, 1980). In order to reproduce the measured noble gas ratios, Lam-mer et al (2021) find that proto-Earth must have grown to a mass of 0.5 − 0.6 M⊕

during the disk’s lifetime, while Venus accreted most of its mass before the disk dis-perses. However, these isotope ratios can also be reproduced through implantation of solar wind onto accreted material (Podosek, 2003; Moreira and Charnoz, 2016; Péron et al, 2016). Nevertheless, the evolution of atmospheric composition is an important constraint on the formation timescale of terrestrial planets in the Solar System. 

# 3 Interaction and feedback between atmosphere, surface, and interior 

Even though the atmosphere and mantle of a planet are not in direct contact any-more after the solidification of the primordial magma ocean, there is still interaction between the atmosphere and mantle. This is primarily facilitated by the transfer of volatile species between the different planetary reservoirs (mantle, crust, ocean, atmo-sphere). For example, volcanic outgassing from the mantle brings various gases into the atmosphere, while simultaneously depleting the mantle. Plate tectonics and crustal delamination can bring surface-bound volatiles back into the mantle (see 2.1.2). These processes form a complex web of interactions which couple the planet’s inte-rior to its atmosphere (Fig. 5). Therefore, the evolution of the atmosphere can not be disentangled from the evolution of the interior. Furthermore, feedback processes aris-ing from these interactions can drastically shape the trajectories a planet’s atmosphere may take (see e.g., Noack et al, 2012; Krissansen-Totton et al, 2021; Baumeister et al, 2023; Gillmann et al, 2022). The fact that the interior, surface, and atmosphere are linked offers the potential to determine characteristics of exoplanet interiors by observing their atmospheric compo-sition. A prerequisite for this is a comprehensive understanding of these processes, and how they and their interactions manifest themselves in the atmospheric composition. Furthermore, the presence of climate feedback loops is critical in the context of planetary habitability. To sustain conditions suitable for the presence of liquid water in the long term, the climate must be stable against perturbations in temperature and composition of the atmosphere, for example from volcanic eruptions or the long-term increase in stellar luminosity. This stability is enabled by negative feedback loops, which counteract deviations from the equilibrium state. The most prominent example on Earth is the carbonate-silicate cycle, which regulates the CO 2 content in the atmosphere to a level which permits temperatures suitable for liquid water, thus preventing Earth from being permanently locked into a snowball or hothouse state. On the other hand, positive feedback cycles can exacerbate perturbations, thus acting to destabilize the climate. If these processes are strong enough, they may push a planet irreversibly toward uninhabitable conditions, as may have happened in the case of Venus. The interactions and feedback loops of atmosphere, surface, and interior further enable us to distinguish between different types of surfaces based on the atmospheric spectrum of a planet (e.g., Byrne et al, 2024; Herbort and Sereinig, 2025). Byrne et al (2026, this Topical collection) reviews our knowledge of Earth’s interior, surface, and 29 Fig. 5 Illustration of the interaction pathways between the interior, surface and atmosphere of a habitable planet. Figure adapted from Gillmann et al (2022). Icons are modified from Pictogrammers, licensed under the Apache License 2.0 (https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0). 

atmospheric composition through time. They then examine, to the best of our present abilities, the same for Mercury, Venus, Mars, Earth’s moon and Jupiter’s moon Io, and how they compare to each other. Finally, they consider exoplanetary worlds that may or may not have direct representation within our solar system. In the future, it might even be possible to extract water/land ratios of temperate rocky exoplanets by observing their reflected light (see e.g, the discussion in Guimond et al, 2026, this Topical collection). 

# 3.1 The carbonate-silicate cycle 

The carbonate-silicate cycle (Fig. 6) is one of the most important long-term feedback cycles on Earth, acting as a “thermostat” (Catling and Kasting, 2017) for Earth’s climate by regulating the amount of CO 2 in the atmosphere (Walker et al, 1981). Atmospheric CO 2 forms carbonic acid in rain water, which can dissolve silicate min-erals (continental weathering). The byproducts are washed into the ocean, where they can form carbonates through biotic and abiotic processes, which then precipitate as sediments on the sea floor. Plate tectonics transports these carbonate layers deep into the mantle. CO 2 is replenished in the atmosphere through volcanic outgassing or 30 Fig. 6 Illustration of the negative feedback loop between CO 2 and silicate weathering that forms the backbone of the carbonate-silicate cycle. Red arrows with a plus mark positive feedbacks. Blue arrows with a minus mark negative feedbacks. After Catling and Kasting (2017). 

metamorphic decarbonation of carbonate rocks at high temperatures and pressures, closing the cycle. Importantly, the weathering processes involve liquid water. As the rate of surface weathering additionally depends on surface temperature and the atmo-spheric concentration of CO 2, this forms a negative feedback cycle, stabilizing the surface temperature and climate against perturbations on geological time scales and on a level that permits liquid water. Should the surface temperature fall below the freezing point of water, the water cycle slows down and with it the weathering rates, thus slowing down CO 2 removal from the atmosphere. CO 2 will continue to accumu-late in the atmosphere due to volcanic outgassing, which eventually brings the surface temperature above freezing again. Likewise, a positive perturbation in atmospheric CO 2 increases the surface temperature, increasing weathering rates and therefore the draw-down of CO 2. In short, the carbonate-silicate cycle maintains a CO 2 level which enables liquid water. Stagnant-lid planets lack the subducting plates to transport carbonates into the interior. However, as long as fresh rock is being created by volcanic activity, CO 2

weathering cycles can still work even in the absence of plate tectonics. Foley and Smye (2018) propose a stagnant-lid carbon cycle where CO 2 is removed by the weathering of newly erupted basaltic rocks. Volcanic activity on stagnant-lid planets tends to be focused locally by hotspots from underlying mantle plumes. Thus, subsequent erup-tions bury weathered crust which, through isostatic adjustment, sinks towards the convective mantle, where it may eventually be recycled by lithospheric delamination. With a sufficient level of ongoing volcanism, this process can stabilize the climate on stagnant-lid planets for several billion years (Foley and Smye, 2018; Foley, 2019; Höning et al, 2019, 2021; Baumeister et al, 2023). An important note to make here is that the conventional definition of the habitable zone (Kasting et al, 1993) implicitly assumes that some form of carbonate-silicate cycle is active to regulate the atmospheric CO 2 concentration. This property of the carbonate-silicate cycle allows a potential population-wide test of the habitable zone. Planets with an active carbonate-silicate cycle near the inner edge of the habitable 31 zone should have low levels of CO 2 in their atmospheres, whereas planets toward the outer edge should have CO 2-rich atmospheres (Catling et al, 2018; Lehmer et al, 2020). This could be tested statistically by observing several tens of Earth-like exoplanets (Lehmer et al, 2020). 

# 3.2 Water vapor and the runaway greenhouse  

> Fig. 7 Illustration of the negative feedback loop between surface temperature and outgoing IR flux (left loop) and the positive feedback loop caused by water vapor (right loop). After Catling and Kasting (2017).

Water plays a central role in many of the climate feedback cycles on Earth, in particular because it is a strong greenhouse gas, but also easily condensable under Earth’s temperature and pressure conditions. As a result, water vapor enacts a pos-itive feedback on the climate system (Fig. 7). The concentration of water vapor is a function of surface temperature according to the saturation pressure of water, where higher temperatures increase evaporation as more water vapor can be stored in the atmosphere. Due to the greenhouse effect of water vapor, this in turn raises the surface temperature further. As a result, water acts as an amplifier for climate perturbations. On Earth, this feedback loop is not strong enough to destabilize the climate system, as on short timescales, the surface temperature is moderated by the planet’s outgoing infrared flux 7). As the surface temperature rises, infrared emission increases likewise, thus cooling the planet. However, this stabilizing process only works to a certain point. If sufficient water vapor is in the atmosphere, the lower atmosphere becomes optically thick, putting a limit on the outgoing IR radiation flux. If the amount of absorbed stellar irradia-tion exceeds this critical flux, termed the Komabayashi-Ingersoll limit (Komabayasi, 1967; Ingersoll, 1969), the surface of the planet heats up uncontrollably in a runaway greenhouse effect, until the entire ocean is evaporated and the surface temperature approaches that of Venus (Komabayasi, 1967; Ingersoll, 1969; Kasting, 1988; Nakajima et al, 1992). The critical outgoing IR flux puts a limit on the instellation a planet can receive and still retain liquid water on its surface, and is thus used to define the inner edge of the habitable zone. Depending on the study, the runaway greenhouse limit is reached at an effective stellar flux Seff (in relation to today’s solar flux at Earth’s orbit) 32 of 1.4 (Kasting, 1988) to 1.05 (Kopparapu et al, 2013) for a planet with an Earth-like mass (for estimations for other surface gravities, see e.g., Pierrehumbert, 2010b). As soon as the water vapor reaches the stratosphere, photodissociation and subse-quent escape of the hydrogen will rapidly desiccate the planet on timescales of tens to hundreds of millions of years (e.g., Kasting, 1988) even before a runaway greenhouse is reached. This ‘moist greenhouse’ state (Kasting, 1988) yields a more conservative estimate on the inner boundary of the habitable zone. Depending on the specifics and complexity of the climate models used, the moist greenhouse limit is somewhere between 1.05 and 1.2 Seff (Kasting et al, 1993; Kopparapu et al, 2013; Leconte et al, 2013; Gómez-Leal et al, 2019). The runaway greenhouse transition may be detectable in the exoplanet popula-tion (Schlecker et al, 2024). Planets undergoing runaway greenhouse conditions are expected, on average, to exhibit larger radii, which could allow one to map out the inner edge given a sample size of > 100 , for example from the PLATO mission (Rauer et al, 2025). Strictly speaking, this conventional definition of the habitable zone assumes that the planet is Earth-like, complete with Earth’s important geological cycles and abun-dant surface water. In reality, many factors will influence this limit significantly. For example, Vladilo et al (2013) find that higher atmospheric pressures broadens the habitable zone in both directions. Likewise, desert planets with limited surface water have significantly extended habitable zones (Abe et al, 2011). Toward the inner edge of the HZ, the dry stratospheres make these planets stable against a runaway green-house, while towards the outer edge, the lack of surface water and clouds available for freezing reduces the ice/albedo feedback (see next section). 

# 3.3 The ice/albedo feedback and Snowball Earths 

Positive feedback loops can destabilize a planet’s climate in both directions. While the water vapor feedback can drive a planet to extreme heating, and even a runaway greenhouse state, the ice-albedo feedback (Fig. 8) can drive a planet into extreme cooling and global glaciation (Budyko, 1969). A decrease in temperature enhances snow and ice cover, which increases the planetary albedo, which lowers the absorbed stellar irradiation, thus cooling the surface further and promoting further ice growth. In extreme cases, this may trigger a ‘Snowball Earth’ state, where the surface becomes nearly entirely frozen with little exposed liquid surface water. On Earth, evidence suggests that global glaciation occurred at the end of the Proterozoic around 750 Myr ago (Hoffman et al, 1998; Hoffman and Schrag, 2002; Maruyama and Santosh, 2008). To trigger a Snowball Earth, some process needs to cool the climate sufficiently so that the ice caps extend past ≈ 30 ◦ latitude, at which point the feedback is strong enough to destabilize the climate (assuming a planet similar to Earth). At this point, the ice caps could rapidly grow and envelop the planet, although GCM simulations suggest that liquid water can remain in stable equatorial water belts (see e.g., Hyde et al, 2000; Abbot et al, 2011; Hoffman et al, 2017; Feulner et al, 2023). In tidally locked aqua planets around M-dwarfs with low insolations it was initially discovered by Pierrehumbert (2010a) that an “eyeball" world would exist where there would only be open ocean at the substellar point, but that the planet would otherwise 33 Fig. 8 Illustration of the positive ice/albedo feedback loop. After Catling and Kasting (2017). 

be frozen over. However, their model had the shortcoming that it did not include oceanic heat transport. It was later demonstrated that in fact the pattern of open ocean at the substellar point would more resemble a “lobster” shape than the more symmetric/circular “eyeball” (e.g. Hu and Yang, 2014; Yang et al, 2014; Del Genio et al, 2019b). Although the ice-albedo feedback (Fig. 8) is less pronounced around M-dwarfs given their blackbody radiation peaks more toward the IR where ice albedo is lower than in the visible, it still exists as shown in some studies (e.g. Del Genio et al, 2019b,a). Earlier work using 3D GCMs for tidally locked planets around M-dwarfs (e.g. Heath et al, 1999; Joshi, 2003) showed that it might be possible to trap most of the planet’s water inventory as ice sheets on the night side which led to the idea that these worlds would not be in the habitable zone, but later work using a full complexity model demonstrated otherwise (Yang et al, 2014). The location of liquid water regions is further influenced by the existence and distribution of landmass (Macdonald et al, 2022). 

# 3.4 Clouds and climate 

Clouds have an extremely important role in the climate of habitable worlds like Earth, but also in other terrestrial worlds in the Solar System such as Venus, Mars and Titan. On Earth, ∼67% of the planet is covered by clouds at any one time with ∼55% coverage over land and ∼72% over the ocean (King et al, 2013). They play multiple first-order roles in the climate such as providing precipitation, but also in the radiative budget. For example, low-level clouds tend to scatter sunlight (short wavelength photons) to space and have little greenhouse effect, whereas high-level clouds tend to trap more long wavelength photons scattered from the surface (See Figure 9) and hence tend to have a greenhouse effect. Clouds have been invoked to solve the Earth’s Faint Young Sun Paradox (Kasting, 2010; Goldblatt and Zahnle, 2011b; Feulner, 2012; Güdel, 2015) but different works give conflicting answers (Rondanelli and Lindzen, 2010; Goldblatt et al, 2021; Goldblatt and Zahnle, 2011a). High altitude cirrus type clouds (efficient at trapping longwave radiation) have been proposed as a possible solution for keeping ancient Mars’ climate warm enough for surface liquid water (e.g. Urata and Toon, 2013; Ramirez and Kasting, 2017). However, they did not provide sufficient warming to fully resolve the issue. Venus’ thick sulfuric acid clouds not only hide the surface of Venus 34 from visible wavelength observations, but provide an extremely high albedo which has provided a featureless surface for Earth-based observers through the centuries. Until the dawn of the space age it was assumed that the clouds were in fact H 2O clouds as on Earth, and that beneath the clouds resided a hidden world filled with exotic life (e.g. O’Rourke et al, 2023). However, Hansen and Hovenier (1974) showed that in fact it was more likely they were 99% H 2SO 4 clouds, as turned out to be true. Clouds on Venus may have also played a highly important role in its early climate history. Work by Yang et al (2014); Way et al (2016); Way et al (2018); Way and Del Genio (2020) showed that for slowly rotating worlds (like Venus) in a temperate state (unlike today’s Venus where surface temperatures are ∼450 ◦C) a large substellar cloud deck could form. This substellar cloud deck would provide a wide area, high albedo surface reflecting back to space much of the planet’s incident stellar radiation. The end result is a world that could have hosted surface liquid water for gigayears, even while its insolation could have ranged from 1.4 to 1.9 times that of modern Earth. This assumes that Venus had a temperate early period, which remains a matter of debate (e.g. Lebrun et al, 2013; Hamano et al, 2013; Turbet et al, 2021). Venus’ thick atmosphere may also have influenced its retrograde rotation rate, but this is still up for discussion (Leconte et al, 2015; Ferraz-Mello, 2026). The effect of clouds and aerosols on exoplanetary atmospheres and their observables may currently be underestimated, although their importance has been recognised since their first detections (see Section 1.2) and initial modeling attempts (e.g., Marley et al, 2013). Finally, many 1D climate models do not include clouds. This has important impli-cations not only for the radiative budget, but also in terms of exoplanet atmosphere observations. Using a full-complexity 3D GCM Fauchez et al (2019) has demon-strated that to fully characterize planetary spectra from climate models clouds must be included. 

# 3.5 Volatile cycles underrepresented in the literature 

## 3.5.1 Nitrogen cycle 

N2 is often assumed as an unreactive background gas in atmospheres of rocky planets, with its partial pressure, pN2, remaining constant over geological timescales. This notion, however, does not necessarily hold because of various abiotic and, in the case of the Earth, biotic sources and sinks (e.g., Stüeken et al, 2016; Sproß et al, 2021). This is also highlighted by potential swings in the Earth’s pN2 and total pressure over time. Whereas pN2 around 3.0 to 3.5 Gyr ago was likely below 1.1 bar, and potentially as low as 0.5 bar (Marty et al, 2013; Avice et al, 2018), the total pressure of Earth’s atmosphere around 2.7 Gyr ago could have been below ∼300 mbar (Som et al, 2016; Rimmer et al, 2019), out of which a significant fraction was CO 2 (Kanzaki and Murakami, 2015). During the Hadean and early Archean eons, the N 2 partial pressure could have been either around 50% higher than at present, based on an increased recycling efficiency of subducted N 2 over time (Barry and Hilton, 2016; Mallik et al, 2018), or lower, presuming an increase in the N 2 degassing rate during the Archean eon (e.g., Mikhail and Sverjensky, 2014; Aulbach and Stagno, 2016). 35 Fig. 9 Cloud effects on Earth’s radiation budget. 

High-energy processes such as lightning (Navarro-González et al, 1998, 2001), mete-orite impacts (e.g., Heays et al, 2022), and cosmic rays (Tabataba-Vakili et al, 2016) can provide sufficient energy to break the triple bond of N 2 and to fix it into NH x

and/or NO x. The first two of these processes were more effective on early Earth than at present (Navarro-González et al, 1998; Sproß et al, 2021), whereas N 2 fixation via cosmic rays and stellar energetic particles (SEP) can be a significant source of N 2

fixation on planets around M dwarfs (Grenfell et al, 2020; Scherf et al, 2024). How-ever, SEPs have also been proposed as a means to break up N 2 while creating N 2Oin early Earth’s atmnosphere, possibly helping to solve the Faint Young Sun Hypoth-esis (Airapetian et al, 2016; Kobayashi et al, 2026). On Earth, however, biological activity was likely the main cause of fluctuations in the N 2 partial pressure over time (Stüeken et al, 2016). Anaerobic biological nitrogen fixation (BNF), which fixes N 2

into bioavailable forms, originated some time before 3.2 Gyr ago (Stüeken et al, 2015, 2020) and could have significantly depleted Earth’s atmospheric N 2 in-line with the low total surface pressure suggested for 2.7 Gyr ago. The first evidence for aerobic biological denitrification was found 2.3 Gyr ago during the Great Oxygenation Event (GOE), marking the onset of Earth’s aerobic nitrogen cycle (Zerkle et al, 2017). Since denitrification releases N 2 back into the atmosphere, it counteracts BNF and has con-tributed to an increase of pN2 during and after the GOE (Stüeken et al, 2016; Sproß et al, 2021). For an abiotic world, the partial pressure of N 2 is expected to increase over geo-logical timescales, at least to a certain extent, as a function of volcanic degassing, nitrogen recycling between the interior and the atmosphere, and abiotic fixation pro-cesses (Stüeken et al, 2016; Laneuville et al, 2018). The amount of N 2 in the atmosphere 36 can hence allow constraints on surface and interior processes of a planet. As long as strong atmospheric losses can be ruled out, little N 2 in the atmosphere likely implies large abiotic fixation processes, whereas large amounts of atmospheric N 2 hint towards a lack of plate tectonics and/or a hydrological cycle, which both aid in recycling N 2

back into the mantle (Laneuville et al, 2018). However, to significantly deplete an N2 atmosphere via abiotic fixation processes on a planet with an anoxic atmosphere in contact with liquid water, it must be >100 times larger than Earth’s present-day abiotic fixation rate (Hu and Delgado Diaz, 2019). For Mars, isotopic signatures imply that most of its N 2 was lost into space early in its history (Kurokawa et al, 2018; Hu and Thomas, 2022), leaving little traces on how the Martian geological evolution may have shaped its nitrogen cycle. For Venus, it is interesting to note that its atmosphere hosts about 3 bar of N 2. This is roughly the same amount of nitrogen presently assumed to be in Earth’s bulk silicate mantle, crust, and atmosphere (Marty, 2012; Li, 2024), which suggests a well-degassed Venusian interior. However, 40 Ar abundances imply that Venus is less degassed than Earth (Kaula, 1999; O’Rourke and Korenaga, 2015). This is a mystery to be solved by future missions to Venus, but it may point toward a comparatively early degassing of (most of) its atmosphere and a subsequent lack of plate tectonics. During the magma ocean phase, or at a later point in its history, a runaway greenhouse phase on Venus led to the escape of hydrogen after photolysis of H 2O and a likely increase in the mantle’s oxidation state via the left-behind oxygen (e.g., Gillmann et al, 2022). Since the degassing capacity of N 2 increases towards larger surface pressures (Gaillard and Scaillet, 2014) and higher oxygen fugacities (Gaillard et al, 2022), this indicates an efficient degassing of N 2 into Venus’ atmosphere (Wordsworth, 2016; Gaillard et al, 2022), even during its present-day conditions (Gillmann et al, 2022). Little N 2 fixation and inefficient recycling due to the lack of plate tectonics and/or a hydrological cycle during the rest of Venus’ history kept most of the N 2 in its atmosphere, compatible with the general abiotic nitrogen cycle scenarios outlined by Laneuville et al (2018). Finally, our solar system hosts three additional bodies with N 2-dominated atmo-spheres, i.e., Titan, Pluto, and Triton. All of these are icy bodies with large nitrogen reservoirs that were either accreted from cometary ammonia ices, complex refractory organics and/or directly from N 2 ices in the protosolar nebula (e.g., Scherf et al, 2020). Titan hosts a thick N 2-dominated atmosphere, which likely originated through the decomposition and degassing of ammonia ices and complex organics from its interior (Glein, 2015; Erkaev et al, 2021). Pluto and Triton, on the other hand, host tenu-ous N 2-dominated atmospheres in evaporation pressure equilibrium with their surface, whose characteristics and evolution are poorly understood (e.g., Scherf et al, 2025). Their location in the outer solar system, their overall composition, and large accreted nitrogen reservoirs lead to completely different mechanisms dominating their nitrogen cycling compared to Venus, Earth, and Mars. However, planetary migration in exo-planetary systems could move such water- and nitrogen-rich bodies closer to their host stars, where they may end up as exotic ocean worlds with highly reducing CO 2 or N 2-dominated atmospheres, at least as long as their planetary mass is sufficiently high to hinder the hydrodynamic escape of nitrogen (Sproß et al, 2021). The gradual warming of a host star at the end of its main-sequence lifetime could have a similar effect; Titan, 37 for instance, could enter a brief phase of liquid water-surface habitability in roughly 6 Gyr from now during the Sun’s red giant phase (Lorenz et al, 1997; Sparrman et al, 2024). Such a scenario might in principle be distinguishable from a rocky exoplanet with a deep global ocean, since N 2 degassing, and hence the build-up of a thick N 2-dominated atmosphere, might be inhibited on water worlds (Krissansen-Totton et al, 2021). 

## 3.5.2 Sulfur cycle 

On modern Earth, sulfur cycles between the hydrosphere, atmosphere, biosphere, pedosphere, and upper lithosphere through geological, biological, and anthropogenic processes. At the same time a large, poorly constrained amount remains sequestered in the core and lower mantle, excluded from the active global cycle (Schoonen, 2016). The largest reservoir is the upper lithosphere and marine sediments, which contains an estimated 10 12 g of sulfur stored as gypsum, anhydrite, metal sulfides, or elemental sulfur (Brimblecombe, 2003). From the lithosphere, sulfur can enter the atmosphere through volcanic degassing, but the atmosphere itself represents the smallest reservoir, holding sulfur primarily as gases such as H 2S, SO 2, DMS, and OCS, or as aerosols like H2SO 4 and (NH 4)2SO 4; additional inputs include dust particles, biogenic emissions, and biomass burning (Schoonen, 2016). These atmospheric sulfur species are rapidly removed by precipitation and deposition, transferring sulfur into the hydrosphere and pedosphere. The hydrosphere, particularly the oceans, constitutes the second-largest reservoir and the site of the most active cycling, with sulfur present mainly as sulfate (Brimblecombe, 2003). Inputs to this pool include weathering of sulfide- and sulfate-bearing rocks and atmospheric deposition, while losses occur through evaporation and microbial processes that reduce sulfate to sulfide or convert it into organo-sulfur com-pounds. In the biosphere and pedosphere, sulfur is found in both organic forms, such as amino acids, and inorganic forms, including sulfates, sulfides, and elemental sul-fur (Brimblecombe, 2003). Today, human activities strongly influence the sulfur cycle by releasing large amounts of SO 2 into the atmosphere and hydrosphere through the burning of sulfur-rich fossil fuels, with estimates suggesting that more than half of the sulfur transported to the oceans by rivers and about 75% of atmospheric sulfur emissions are anthropogenic in origin (Berner and Berner, 2012). Venus’ atmosphere today contains about 200 ppm sulfur, primarily in the form of SO 2 and its oxidation product H 2SO 4 (Basilevsky and Head, 2003). During planetary accretion and any early magma ocean stage, volatiles dissolved in the melt—including S, C, and H—would have been outgassed into the nascent atmosphere, and models suggest that this large-scale degassing delivered substantial sulfur, both as SO 2 and reduced sulfur gases, very early in Venus’s history (Fegley, 2003). After the magma ocean cooled, continuing volcanic activity provided the dominant source of sulfur to the atmosphere (Fegley, 2003). Geological evidence indicates that Venus underwent major resurfacing episodes, as reflected in its relatively young surface age and widespread lava plains. If resurfacing occurred in pulses, each episode would have injected large SO 2 loads into the atmosphere, with significant consequences for cloud formation and atmospheric chemistry (Taylor and Grinspoon, 2009). In the present atmosphere, intense ultraviolet radiation drives photolysis of CO 2 into CO and O, and the resulting 38 oxygen oxidizes SO 2 to SO 3, which ultimately hydrates to form H 2SO 4. Sulfuric acid then condenses into droplets and aerosols, forming the planet’s extensive cloud decks (Marcq, 2018). SO 2 also dissolves into cloud droplets, where interactions with salts or hydroxides can sequester sulfur temporarily from the gas phase (Rimmer et al, 2023). Unlike Earth, however, Venus lacks a rainout mechanism to remove H 2SO 4 from the atmosphere. Instead, laboratory experiments suggest that SO 2 can react directly with surface basalts to form secondary sulfates such as CaSO 4, MgSO 4, and Na 2SO 4,providing a significant near-surface sulfur sink (Radoman-Shaw et al, 2022; Renggli et al, 2019). Because Venus does not exhibit Earth-like plate tectonics, recycling of sulfur into the mantle is unlikely (Byrne et al, 2021; Gulcher et al, 2020). Nevertheless, high resurfacing rates could permit burial and partial remobilization of sulfur-bearing basalts into magmatic systems, offering a possible, if incomplete, mechanism for closing the sulfur cycle. Io, the innermost of Jupiter’s Galilean moons, is the most volcanically active body in the solar system due to intense tidal heating driven by the gravitational interaction with Jupiter and its neighboring moons, particularly Europa (Geissler and McMil-lan, 2008). During its early evolution, Io likely accreted volatiles such as hydrogen, carbon, and nitrogen, but these were lost over time as a result of its vigorous volcan-ism and interactions with Jupiter’s magnetosphere. In particular, elastic scattering by high-energy protons in the magnetosphere caused the ejection of these lighter, reduced gases—such as H 2 and CO—from Io’s exosphere into the surrounding plasma environment, gradually oxidizing the moon’s surface chemistry and leaving sulfur pre-dominantly in the form of SO 2 (Pollack and Yung, 1980). Unlike the lighter volatiles, sulfur is heavier and more likely to remain near the surface, where it condenses and precipitates, leading to Io’s desiccation and making it an archetype for a planetary body governed by sulfur-driven geochemical processes. Sulfur gases such as SO 2, S 2,and SO are either directly degassed from Io’s volcanoes or produced through interac-tions between lava and surface SO 2 ice. These volcanic emissions often condense to form various sulfur ices, giving Io its characteristic multicolored surface with hues of white, yellow, orange, red, green, and black. Some volcanic plumes can reach altitudes of up to 500 km, and gases that escape Io’s gravity contribute to a surrounding neu-tral torus. In this region, sulfur species are ionized through photochemical reactions to form the Io plasma torus, which primarily consists of ions such as S +, O +, SO +,and SO 2+ (Thomas et al, 2004). These ions can then be accelerated within Jupiter’s magnetosphere and transported to Jupiter’s atmosphere or to other Galilean moons (Lodders and Fegley, 2024). The ongoing degassing of volcanic vents, along with sub-limation and sputtering of surface ices, sustains Io’s tenuous atmosphere, which has a surface pressure ranging from 0.3 to 3 nbar on the day side and consists mostly of SO 2

(90%) along with minor constituents like S 2, S 2O, NaCl, and KCl, under average day-time temperatures around 130 K (Spencer et al, 2000). Additionally, SO 2 ice on the surface undergoes radiolysis, forming SO 3, and this ice is eventually buried and recy-cled back into Io’s interior, where it is re-incorporated into volcanic activity—thereby closing Io’s sulfur cycle. 39 Sulfur cycles as observed on Io have recently gained increased attention, due to tentative detections of SO 2 in the atmosphere of rocky planets (Bello-Arufe et al, 2025; Nicholls et al, 2026). 

# 4 Effect of life on the atmosphere 

# 4.1 Habitable atmospheres 

While the composition of the modern atmosphere of Earth is clearly linked to the existence of life (see above and in Figs. 2,10), a habitable atmosphere does not neces-sarily need to be comprised of oxygen and nitrogen. As a matter of fact, since oxygen reacts easily and can therefore be very destructive, life first needed to adapt to the current oxygen-rich conditions before thriving in it (because of its reactive potential, it serves as an excellent energy source for life). While the exact atmospheric com-position and redox state of the Hadean and Archean Earth remain unknown, we do know that free oxygen was mostly found at levels <10 −6 Present Atmospheric Level prior to the Great Oxygenation Event (explained in more detail in Section 4.2). Such reducing conditions are favorable for prebiotic chemistry (e.g., Luisi, 2016; Lingam, 2020), as demonstrated in the Urey-Miller experiment and follow-up experiments, to spontaneously create amino acids and other prebiotic molecules in reducing to mod-erately oxidizing atmospheres (Miller and Urey, 1959). Macroscopic life, on the other hand, may be impossible without incorporating oxygen, and past bursts in growth of individual life forms are directly correlated with atmospheric oxygen levels (Payne et al, 2009; Vilović et al, 2023). We therefore need to distinguish between different habitable conditions — for the origin of life, as well as for the long-term evolution of macroscopic life. This implies, specifically, that an abiotically produced oxygen-rich atmosphere may not be favorable for the origin of life. The atmosphere composition suitable for macroscopic, complex animal-like life has been suggested to lie in relatively narrow pressure limits for O 2 (Catling et al, 2005), CO 2 (Schwieterman et al, 2019), and N 2 (Ramirez and Levi, 2018); see Fig. 4 in Lammer et al (2024) for a review. These are mainly toxicity limits for CO 2 and N 2 that may, in principle, vary for other inhabited planets based on the specific evolutionary pathways taken (Scherf et al, 2024). O, on the other hand, provides physical limits that can be expected to be valid for any macroscopic animal-like life (Catling et al, 2005). Oxygen provides by far the highest free energy of all elements that can considerably accumulate in an atmosphere, and aerobic metabolism supplies about an order of magnitude more energy than anaerobic metabolism (see in-depth discussion in Catling et al, 2005). Anaerobic organisms are therefore highly restricted in their growth and size, whereas aerobic macroscopic life is either limited in its physical size by oxygen diffusion (and hence O 2 partial pressure), or has to evolve a circulatory system that transports oxygen effectively through the entire body. An O 2 mixing ratio beyond 

∼30%, on the other hand, leads to uncontrollable flammability, (e.g., Belcher et al, 2010; Balbi and Frank, 2024) potentially serving as a regulatory factor for the O 2

mixing ratio on an inhabited planet (Belcher et al, 2010, 2021). Therefore, we need to keep in mind that the variety of habitable atmospheres might be much more restricted 40 for macroscopic than for microscopic life. In addition, we highlight that “habitable” does not necessarily mean “inhabited” (see review by Cockell et al, 2016). 

# 4.2 Inhabited atmospheres like Earth 

We start first with what we know best, Earth. Although the dates for the rise of life on Earth are debated (e.g. Westall et al, 2023, Section 2.2.3), it is clear that some of the first life forms to influence the atmosphere were methanogens in the Archean (3-8–2.5 Ga), which used H 2 and CO 2 to produce CH 4 via the reaction CO 2+4 H 2→CH 4+2H 2O. Given the lack of O 2 in this epoch, the longer residence life-time of CH 4 (compared to today) would imply substantial build-up of this powerful greenhouse gas. It has long been speculated that it could have played a role in the Faint Young Sun Paradox given that Earth’s insolation was 20–25% less in the Archean than today, and a modern atmospheric composition at that time would otherwise pro-duce a snowball Earth that is not supported by proxy data (e.g. Wilde et al, 2001; Valley et al, 2002). At the same time, it is clear that CO 2 partial pressures were also higher (e.g. Feulner et al, 2023). However, one cannot have too much of a good thing, if the CH 4 to CO 2 ratio is ∼0.1 or higher hydrocarbon hazes (e.g., C 5H4, C 4H2, etc.) can form, which exert a cooling effect on the atmosphere (e.g. Haqq-Misra et al, 2008; Arney et al, 2018). CH 4 in particular may be observable in planetary transmission spectra from JWST or LUVOIR/HWO (see Figure 10), but clouds and hydrocarbon hazes make the detection of CH 4 and other species more challenging (e.g. Fauchez et al, 2019). However, CH 4 may also be produced abiotically via processes in the upper mantle and crust (e.g. Des Marais et al, 2002), motivating the need to rule out the detection of CO — a so-called anti-biosignature — to strengthen the case for CH 4 as a biosignature (Krissansen-Totton et al, 2022; Thompson et al, 2022). As we move forward in Earth’s history into the Proterozoic (2.5 Ga–541 Ma) at around 2.5 Ga we have the Great Oxygenation Event (GOE) which is believed to have been driven by the rise of cyanobacteria (e.g. Kasting and Catling, 2003; Lyons et al, 2014). For many years it was assumed that O 2 was an excellent biosignature (e.g. Des Marais et al, 2002), but it was later realized that it is in fact an ambiguous one. For example, it is possible to create large quantities of O 2 abiotically via photolysis of H 2O coupled with high rates of atmospheric escape producing 100s if not 1000s of bars of O 2 possibly in a runaway or post-runaway greenhouse state (e.g. Luger and Barnes, 2015; Meadows, 2017). But there are other mechanisms for producing O 2 and even O 3 abiotically (e.g. Schwieterman et al, 2018). Schwieterman et al (2018) provides an in-depth review of exoplanet biosignature gases (also see Section 5). Other work by Léger et al (2011) showed that abiotic build-up of O 2 on a habitable planet was unlikely, but later work by Narita et al (2015) maintained that it was still possible. Earth provides three main epochs in which its atmosphere has changed sufficiently to be distinguishable if observed as an exoplanet, in the Archean, Proterozoic, and Modern epochs as can be seen in Figure 10. 41 Fig. 10 Hypothetical transmission spectra of Earth through time as seen with the proposed LUVOIR/HWO telescope (The LUVOIR Team, 2019). Credit: G. Arney, S. Domagal-Goldman, T. B. Griswold (NASA GSFC) 

# 5 Role of photochemistry 

The incident near-UV to X-ray flux from the host star is an important driver of chemistry in planetary atmospheres, responsible for various photodissociation and photoionization reactions (e.g., Yung and Demore, 1999; Bauer and Lammer, 2004). The far-UV (920-1700 Å) is absorbed at pressure levels above about 0.1 mbar, that is, in the mesosphere and the lower thermosphere in the case of the Earth, whereas the near-UV (1700-3200 Å) can reach further down to the stratosphere and troposphere (see Figure 11, panel c). Various molecules such as CH 4, O 2, H 2O, CO 2, and N 2Ohave large parts of their photodissociation cross-sections in the far-UV, with the latter three of them expanding toward the near-UV (e.g., Loyd et al, 2016; Linsky, 2025), as can be seen in panels (a) and (b) of Figure 11. These UV photons drive oxygen photochemistry via the dissociation of molecules such as H 2O, O 2 and CO 2, and subsequent three-body reactions, for example, O + O 2 + M → O3 + M , where M is an atmospheric molecule needed to ensure momentum balance, can then further produce ozone (e.g., Bauer and Lammer, 2004). Low-mass M dwarfs are specifically active in the far-UV (e.g., France et al, 2016; Loyd et al, 2016) and it was suggested that habitable zone planets orbiting these stars can therefore build up atmospheres with high O 2 and O 3 mixing ratios produced purely by photochemistry (e.g., Gao et al, 2015; Harman et al, 2015). More recent studies indicate that these results are sensitive to various model assumptions, such as the implemented lightning rates and the related production of NO x species (Harman et al, 2018), the chosen photodissociation cross-sections (Ranjan et al, 2020), and the pressure range of the upper model boundary (Ranjan et al, 2023). The abiotic build-up of photochemically produced O 2 may hence be less efficient as recently assumed, since CO can efficiently recombine to CO 2 via OH as a catalyst under properly chosen model conditions (Harman et al, 2018; Ranjan et al, 2023). Still, Ranjan et al (2023) point out that an abiotic build-up of O 3 remains feasible in these photochemical models around M dwarfs. 42 EUV FUV NUV 1000 1500 2000 Altitude (km) Wavelength, λ [Å]Approximate pressure (mbar) -6.4 -6.0 -5.3 -3.5 03

(a) 

(b) (c)    

> thermosphere mesosphere stratosphere Lyman-α
> 250 200 150 100 50 0Altitude (km)  O3pothodissociation cross-section (most dissociation between 2500-3200 Å)

Fig. 11 a) top panel: photodissociation cross-sections of various molecules. bottom panel: spectral energy distribution of the Sun, the most active ( ϵ Eri; with ∼0.85 M ⊙ and an age of ∼ 660 Myr) and the least active (GJ 581; with ∼0.3 M ⊙ and an age of ∼ 9.5 Gyr) star of the MUSCLES survey (France et al, 2016; Loyd et al, 2016) defined by the ratio of the FUV(far ultraviolet) to bolometric flux. The panel shows the photon flux density scaled to a bolometric flux equivalent to Earth’s insolation. (b) Cumulative photodissociation spectra of the same molecules based on the curves in panel (a). The three curves per molecule correspond to the three aforementioned reference stars. (c) Absorption altitudes and approximate pressure levels of unit optical depth (i.e., about 63% of the flux is absorbed above this altitude) of the same wavelength range as depicted in panels (a) and (b) for the Earth’s present atmosphere; note that the absorption altitudes differ for different atmospheric compositions. For the absorption altitudes, see, e.g., Meier et al (1997) and Woods et al (2000). This panel also schematically depicts the wavelengths at which O 3 photodissociates. However, most of the photodissociation of O 3 for the Sun and ϵ Eri takes place between 2500 and 3200 Å (Loyd et al, 2016, see also their Fig. 10). The vertical blue dashed lines depict the EUV (extreme ultraviolet), FUV (far ultraviolet), and NUV (near ultraviolet) wavelength ranges. Subfigures (a) and (b) are adopted from Loyd et al (2016); the data of the absorption altitudes in (c) is taken from Woods et al (2000), their Fig. 2. 

43 However, photochemical models often do not include the thermosphere, that is, the region in the atmosphere above the mesosphere where the XUV flux – the extreme-UV (100-920 Å) and the X-ray part of the spectrum (10-100 Å) – is predominantly absorbed. In the Earth’s atmosphere, this happens at a relatively broad range of pressure levels between ∼ 0.1 mbar in the upper mesosphere and ∼ 10 −6 mbar in the thermosphere (e.g., Bauer and Lammer, 2004). The absorbed XUV flux (or, more broadly, the absorbed wavelength range below the Lyman-α line at 1215 Å) in the upper atmosphere is an important driver for photodissociation of, e.g., H 2, CO, N 2,and CO 2 (Loyd et al, 2016; Linsky, 2025), as can be seen in panel (b) of Figure 11. In addition, it is primarily responsible for photoionization, the corresponding formation of an ionosphere, and thermospheric heating (Bauer and Lammer, 2004). Because of the latter, highly irradiated atmospheres, such as planets in the HZ of M dwarfs (e.g., Van Looveren et al, 2024; Scherf et al, 2024), can have significantly expanded atmospheres and strong thermal escape due to the large amounts of energy deposited into the thermosphere. High-energy photons in the thermosphere can also dissociate molecules that cool the atmosphere, such as CO 2 (Tian et al, 2009; Johnstone et al, 2021b). As the altitude at which the XUV flux is typically absorbed increases for expanding atmospheres, it is important to note that thermal escape calculated via the energy-limited escape formulation (see Equation 3) depends on R2XUV Rpl , and not, as often simplified, on R3pl (e.g., Erkaev et al, 2016). Estimating thermal losses via the latter simplification can, therefore, lead to a significant underestimation of atmospheric escape rates. Since the XUV flux absorbed in the thermosphere drives photodissociation, pho-toionization, and atmospheric escape, one has to take account of the upper atmosphere (i.e., the thermosphere above ∼80 km) for evaluating whether O 2 and O 3 may consti-tute a false-positive biosignature (e.g., Meadows et al, 2018; Schwieterman and Leung, 2024). As thermal escape preferentially removes the lighter species from the atmo-sphere, the photodissociation of H 2O, mostly via absorption at the Lyman-α line (see Figure 11), can lead to an accumulation of O 2 compared to H (Tian et al, 2014; Luger and Barnes, 2015; Wordsworth and Pierrehumbert, 2014; Wordsworth et al, 2018; Johnstone, 2020). The high XUV activity of M dwarfs their habitable zones (e.g., Johnstone et al, 2021a) favors such scenarios, but highly active young K and G stars can also lead to an accumulation of O 2 on planets within their HZs (Johnstone, 2020). In addition, one should also note that CO, which drives the recombination of CO 2 and hence the decrease of abiotically produced O 2 (Ranjan et al, 2023), is dissociated in the thermosphere as most of its photodissociation cross-section is in the XUV (Loyd et al, 2016). Another relevant photochemical process in the upper atmosphere is the production of suprathermal atoms. This is an important source of non-thermal escape in terrestrial atmospheres (see Section 2.3.1, specifically for Mars) since the related photochemical reactions usually include the excitation of atoms above energy levels needed for gain-ing escape velocity (Bauer and Lammer, 2004). These reactions comprise radiative recombination reactions, which can be expressed as 

X+ + e → X∗ + ∆E , (4) 44 where X is the initially ionized species, e is a photoelectron, and ∗ denotes the excited state of species X. They also include dissociative recombination reactions in the form of 

XY + + e → XY ∗ → X∗ + Y + ∆E , (5) where XY is the molecule, X and Y are its dissociation products, and + and ∗ again refer to the ionized and excited states, respectively. In both reaction pathways, the excess energy ∆E goes into the kinetic energy of the neutralized particles (Bauer and Lammer, 2004). Dissociative recombination coefficients (in the order of 10 −7 cm 3 s−1)are typically orders of magnitude larger than radiative recombination coefficients (in the order of 10 −12 cm 3 s−1), making dissociative recombination one of the most impor-tant photochemical loss processes in planetary atmospheres (e.g., Biondi, 1969; Bauer and Lammer, 2004); see Section 2.3.1 for a discussion on the role of photochemical escape on Venus and Mars. Photochemistry in the upper atmosphere also depends on atmospheric compo-sition. For hydrogen-rich atmospheres, lower atmospheric layers are dominated by molecules such as H 2, H 2O, and CH 4 (e.g., Hu et al, 2012; Madhusudhan et al, 2016). There, the radical OH is much less abundant by orders of magnitude than atomic H. OH, which forms from the dissociation of H 2O, quickly reacts with H 2 to reform H2O, a process that assures a long lifetime of CH 4 and CO (Hu et al, 2012). In the thermosphere, H 2 becomes increasingly photodissociated, and H becomes ionized. In H-He-dominated atmospheres, most of the absorbed energy from the incident XUV flux feeds the photo-dissociation and -ionization of H 2, and H and He, respectively, but the excess energy heats the atmosphere and drives atmospheric expansion and escape (e.g., Shematovich et al, 2014; Erkaev et al, 2016; Salz et al, 2016; Linsky, 2025). Similar to hydrogen-rich atmospheres, the lifetimes of CH 4 and CO are long in CO 2- and N 2-dominated atmospheres and mostly depend on the availability of OH (Hu et al, 2012). In reduced N 2-dominated atmospheres, a rich hydrocarbon chem-istry can take place that forms hazes and aerosols, for which CH radicals produced from the photodissociation of CH 4 via far-UV irradiation play an important role (e.g, Trainer et al, 2012; Carrasco et al, 2022). This can be observed today at Titan, (e.g., Lavvas et al, 2008), Pluto and Triton (e.g., Luspay-Kuti and Mandt, 2025), and a photochemically produced hydrocarbon haze layer could have also been present on the Archean Earth (e.g., Pavlov et al, 2001). There, such a layer may have formed for CH 4

and CO 2 abundances of CH 4/CO 2≥ 0.1 (e.g., Trainer et al, 2004; Mak et al, 2023), although with a different chemical composition as on Titan (Mak et al, 2023). Hazy atmospheres, similar to the Earth’s prior to the Great Oxygenation event, as, e.g., recently simulated for TRAPPIST-1e (Mak et al, 2024), may also exist on exoplanets and often serve as example atmospheres of habitats with primitive pre-photosynthesizing life (e.g, Eager-Nash et al, 2024). However, one has to account for the incident XUV flux and the related thermal stability of these atmospheres. It is unlikely that secondary, Earth-like atmospheres are thermally stable on planets orbit-ing in the HZ of low-mass M dwarfs such as TRAPPIST-1e (Van Looveren et al, 2024; Scherf et al, 2024). Simulating the photochemistry of specific atmospheres on these planets should, therefore, either include a proper treatment of their thermospheres that also investigates their thermal stability, or the results must be viewed cautiously. 45 If the assumed atmosphere cannot exist because of the high incident XUV flux, neither simulating their photochemistry nor their climates has a practical physical sense. 

# 6 Summary 

This review highlights that the composition of the atmosphere of a rocky exoplanet is not static in time but evolves throughout the lifetime of the planet through interactions with the planet’s interior, stellar irradiation, and, potentially, biological activity. In order for a rocky planet to retain an atmosphere in the first place, the volatile source flux must exceed the combined loss of volatiles via escape to space and seques-tration into the planetary interior. There are two main ways how a rocky planet can gain an atmosphere. The first is the direct capture of a primordial atmosphere during formation, and the second is through outgassing of volatiles that are initially stored in the interior of the planet. These secondary atmospheres are further divided in atmo-spheres formed by the outgassing of volatiles during the solidification of the magma ocean and volcanic outgassing, which can act over Gyr timescales. In the first few 100s Myr, the most dominating escape mechanism is hydrodynamic thermal escape. As the planet evolves, the dominating escape process shifts to non-thermal escape processes, such as photochemical escape and stellar-wind escape. The biggest difference between the two escape processes is that thermal escape is in general more efficient at removing lighter species especially for planets that experience XUV fluxes similar to ones of the terrestrial planets in the Solar System , while non-thermal escape processes can also remove heavier species. Rocky planets likely undergo episodic atmospheric replenishment after significant mass-loss events throughout their lifetime. The volatile mixtures degassed into the atmosphere further undergo significant transformations through selective loss to space, photochemical reactions in the upper atmosphere, and fluid-rock interactions in the lower atmosphere. These processes can drastically alter the composition of the volcanic atmosphere compared to the initial composition after outgassing. The interaction between the interior and the atmosphere continues throughout an active planet’s lifetime. On modern Earth the carbonate-silicate cycle in concert with subductive plate tectonics provides a means to stabilize the climate over long time-scales providing long-term habitability. However, even on a planet with a stagnant lid there are means to provide volatile cycling over shorter timescales of order 1 Gyr. With volatile cycling a planet can end up in a moist or runaway greenhouse state (like Venus) or conversely a snowball state via the ice/albedo feedback as seen in Earth’s distant past over short periods of time. Clouds play a key role in the radiative budget of a planet, and may even provide a means to stabilize the climate of a planet inside the conservative habitable zone via the cloud-albedo feedback seen in simulations of slowly rotating worlds. In addition to conventional volatile cycling, Nitrogen and Sulfur cycling may also take place. Venus has more than three times Earth’s atmospheric nitrogen budget, which is likely tied to its distinct outgassing history from Earth and a long-term lack of plate tectonics (see Section 3.5.1 above). The effect of life on an atmosphere and the search for it via unambiguous biosig-natures remains one of the most sought after goals in exoplanetary science. We know 46 that Earth has exhibited biosignature gases such as CH 4 since the early Archean and the rise of microscopic life. CH 4 could have also played a critical role in resolving the Faint Young Sun Paradox: the fact that the sun was 25% less luminous ∼ 4Gyr ago and was not in a snowball state. Earth’s great oxygenation event, driven by cyanobac-teria, completely transformed the atmosphere and eventually gave rise to diverse forms of macroscopic life. Yet CH 4 and O 2 are in fact not unambiguous biosignature gases. For this reason the search of unambiguous biosignature gases remains an active area of research. The characterization of a large sample of rocky exoplanet atmospheres with cur-rent and upcoming telescopes will therefore allow us to deepen our understanding of rocky exoplanets and their interior. It is especially important to probe planets across a variety of ages and environments. However, interpreting the observations of rocky planet atmospheres necessitates the understanding of the interdependent nature of diverse planetary and atmospheric processes. This will require not just advancements in instrumentation and observational techniques, but, crucially, the development of numerical models capable of simulating the co-evolution of the atmosphere and interior of rocky planets as a single system. The development of such models further requires robust knowledge of the physiochemical properties, such as solubility and partitioning coefficients, of key volatiles across a wide range of pressures, temperatures and redox states. Furthermore, aerosols remain a major uncertainty in understanding the atmo-spheres of rocky exoplanets, demanding improvements in microphysical modelling and the acquisition of new laboratory data. Most importantly, we need to foster strong multidisciplinary collaborations to truly understand and characterize rocky exoplanets. 

Acknowledgements. The authors thank the anonymous reviewer for their insight-ful comments and the International Space Science Institute and the organizers for hosting and managing the workshop ”The Geoscience of (Exo)planets: Going beyond habitability”, from which this article originated. We would also like to thank A. Man-dell, J. Lustig-Yaeger and R. Hu for useful discussions and comments. MS thanks the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) for the support of the VeReDo research project, grant I6857-N. This project was funded by the European Union (ERC, DIVERSE, 101087755). Views and opinions expressed are however those of the author(s) only and do not necessarily reflect those of the European Union or the European Research Council Executive Agency. Neither the European Union nor the granting authority can be held responsible for them. 

# Declarations 

• The authors declare that there are no competing interests. 

# References 

Abbot DS, Voigt A, Koll D (2011) The Jormungand global climate state and implications for Neoproterozoic glaciations. Journal of Geophysical Research 116(D18):D18103. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JD015927 47 Abe T, Whalen BA, Yau AW, et al (1993) EXOS D (Akebono) suprathermal mass spectrometer observations of the polar wind. J. Geophys. Res.98(A7):11191–11204. https://doi.org/10.1029/92JA01971 Abe Y, Abe-Ouchi A, Sleep NH, et al (2011) Habitable Zone Limits for Dry Planets. Astrobiology 11(5):443–460. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2010.0545 Airapetian V, Glocer A, Gronoff G, et al (2016) Prebiotic chemistry and atmospheric warming of early earth by an active young sun. Nature Geoscience 9(6):452–455 Alcott LJ, Mills BJ, Poulton SW (2019) Stepwise earth oxygenation is an inherent property of global biogeochemical cycling. Science 366(6471):1333–1337 Alibert Y (2017) Maximum mass of planetary embryos that formed in core-accretion models. A&A606:A69. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201630051 Allart R, Bourrier V, Lovis C, et al (2018) Spectrally resolved helium absorp-tion from the extended atmosphere of a warm Neptune-mass exoplanet. Science 362(6421):1384–1387. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aat5879 Amerstorfer UV, Gröller H, Lichtenegger H, et al (2017) Escape and evolution of Mars’s CO 2 atmosphere: Influence of suprathermal atoms. Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets) 122(6):1321–1337. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JE005175 Anderson DEJr. (1976) The Mariner 5 Ultraviolet Photometer Experiment: Analysis of hydrogen lyman alpha data. J. Geophys. Res.81(7):1213. https://doi.org/10.1029/ JA081i007p01213 Armitage PJ (2011) Dynamics of Protoplanetary Disks. ARA&A49(1):195–236. https: //doi.org/10.1146/annurev-astro-081710-102521 Arney G, Domagal-Goldman SD, Meadows VS (2018) Organic haze as a biosignature in anoxic earth-like atmospheres. Astrobiology 18:311–329 August PC, Buchhave LA, Diamond-Lowe H, et al (2025) Hot Rocks Survey I: A possible shallow eclipse for LHS 1478 b. A&A695:A171. https://doi.org/10.1051/ 0004-6361/202452611 Aulbach S, Stagno V (2016) Evidence for a reducing Archean ambient mantle and its effects on the carbon cycle. Geology 44(9):751–754. https://doi.org/10.1130/ G38070.1 Avice G, Marty B, Burgess R, et al (2018) Evolution of atmospheric xenon and other noble gases inferred from Archean to Paleoproterozoic rocks. Geochimica Cosmochimica Acta232:82–100. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2018.04.018 Balbi A, Frank A (2024) The oxygen bottleneck for technospheres. Nature Astronomy 8(1):39–43 48 Baliukin II, Bertaux JL, Quémerais E, et al (2019) Swan/soho lyman-α mapping: The hydrogen geocorona extends well beyond the moon. Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics 124(2):861–885. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/ 2018JA026136 Barabash S, Fedorov A, Sauvaud JJ, et al (2007) The loss of ions from Venus through the plasma wake. Nature450(7170):650–653. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature06434 Barry PH, Hilton DR (2016) Release of subducted sedimentary nitrogen throughout earth’s mantle. Geochemical Perspectives Letters 2(2):148–159. https://doi.org/10. 7185/geochemlet.1615 Basilevsky AT, Head JW (2003) The surface of venus. Reports on Progress in Physics 66(10):1699–1734. https://doi.org/10.1088/0034-4885/66/10/R04 Bauer SJ, Lammer H (2004) Planetary aeronomy : atmosphere environments in planetary systems Baumeister P, Tosi N, Brachmann C, et al (2023) Redox state and interior struc-ture control on the long-term habitability of stagnant-lid planets. Astronomy & Astrophysics 675:A122. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202245791 Baumeister P, Miozzi F, Guimond CM, et al (2025) Fundamentals of Interior Modelling and Challenges in the Interpretation of Observed Rocky Exoplanets. Space Science Reviews 221(8):123. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-025-01248-5 Beatty TG, Welbanks L, Schlawin E, et al (2024) Sulfur Dioxide and Other Molecular Species in the Atmosphere of the Sub-Neptune GJ 3470 b. ApJ970(1):L10. https: //doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/ad55e9 Belcher C, Mills B, Vitali R, et al (2021) The rise of angiosperms strengthened fire feed-backs and improved the regulation of atmospheric oxygen. Nature Communications 12. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-20772-2 Belcher CM, Yearsley JM, Hadden RM, et al (2010) Baseline intrinsic flammability of earth’s ecosystems estimated from paleoatmospheric oxygen over the past 350 mil-lion years. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 107(52):22448–22453. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1011974107, URL https://www.pnas.org/doi/abs/10. 1073/pnas.1011974107, https://www.pnas.org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.1011974107 Bello-Arufe A, Damiano M, Bennett KA, et al (2025) Evidence for a volcanic atmosphere on the sub-earth l 98-59 b. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 980(2):L26 Belu A, Selsis F, Morales JC, et al (2011) Primary and secondary eclipse spectroscopy with jwst: exploring the exoplanet parameter space. Astronomy & Astrophysics 525:A83 49 Benedikt MR, Scherf M, Lammer H, et al (2020) Escape of rock-forming volatile elements and noble gases from planetary embryos. Icarus347:113772. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.icarus.2020.113772 Benneke B, Roy PA, Coulombe LP, et al (2024) JWST Reveals CH$_4$, CO$_2$, and H$_2$O in a Metal-rich Miscible Atmosphere on a Two-Earth-Radius Exoplanet. URL http://arxiv.org/abs/2403.03325, arXiv:2403.03325 [astro-ph] Berdyugina SV, Berdyugin AV, Fluri DM, et al (2008) First Detection of Polarized Scattered Light from an Exoplanetary Atmosphere. ApJ673(1):L83. https://doi. org/10.1086/527320 Berdyugina SV, Berdyugin AV, Fluri DM, et al (2011) Polarized Reflected Light from the Exoplanet HD189733b: First Multicolor Observations and Confirmation of Detection. ApJ728(1):L6. https://doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/728/1/L6 Berger TA, Huber D, Gaidos E, et al (2020) The Gaia-Kepler Stellar Properties Catalog. II. Planet Radius Demographics as a Function of Stellar Mass and Age. AJ160(3):108. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/aba18a Berner EK, Berner RA (2012) Global environment: water, air, and geochemical cycles. Princeton University Press Bertaux JL, Blamont J, Marcelin M, et al (1978) Lyman-alpha observations of venera-9 and 10 I. The non-thermal hydrogen population in the exosphere of venus. Planet. Space Sci.26(9):817–831. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-0633(78)90105-8 Bertaux JL, Lepine VM, Kurt VG, et al (1982) Altitude profile of H in the atmo-sphere of Venus from Lyman α observations of Venera 11 and Venera 12 and origin of the hot exospheric component. Icarus52(2):221–244. https://doi.org/10.1016/ 0019-1035(82)90110-5 Bhattacharyya D, Clarke JT, Mayyasi M, et al (2023) Evidence of non-thermal hydro-gen in the exosphere of mars resulting in enhanced water loss. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 128(8):e2023JE007801. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/ 2023JE007801 Biersteker JB, Schlichting HE (2021) Losing oceans: The effects of composition on the thermal component of impact-driven atmospheric loss. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 501(1):587–595 Biondi MA (1969) Atmospheric electron–ion and ion–ion recombination processes. Canadian Journal of Chemistry 47(10):1711–1719. https://doi.org/10.1139/v69-282 Bond DP, Grasby SE (2017) On the causes of mass extinctions. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology 478:3–29 50 Bonomo A, Dumusque X, Massa A, et al (2023) Cold jupiters and improved masses in 38 kepler and k2 small planet systems from 3661 harps-n radial velocities-no excess of cold jupiters in small planet systems. Astronomy & Astrophysics 677:A33 Bower DJ, Kitzmann D, Wolf AS, et al (2019) Linking the evolution of terrestrial inte-riors and an early outgassed atmosphere to astrophysical observations. Astronomy & Astrophysics 631:A103 Bower DJ, Hakim K, Sossi PA, et al (2022) Retention of Water in Terrestrial Magma Oceans and Carbon-rich Early Atmospheres. The Planetary Science Journal3(4):93. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ac5fb1 Brachmann C, Noack L, Baumeister PA, et al (2025) Distinct types of chon atmo-spheres and surface pressures depending on melt redox state and outgassing efficiency. Icarus 429:116450 Brain DA, McFadden JP, Halekas JS, et al (2015) The spatial distribution of planetary ion fluxes near mars observed by maven. Geophysical Research Letters 42(21):9142– 9148. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1002/2015GL065293 Brimblecombe P (2003) The global sulfur cycle. Treatise on geochemistry pp 645–682 Brouwers MG, Vazan A, Ormel CW (2018) How cores grow by pebble accretion. I. Direct core growth. A&A611:A65. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201731824 Budyko MI (1969) The effect of solar radiation variations on the climate of the Earth. Tellus A: Dynamic Meteorology and Oceanography 21(5):611. https://doi.org/10. 3402/tellusa.v21i5.10109 Burgisser A, Scaillet B (2007) Redox evolution of a degassing magma rising to the surface. Nature 445(7124):194–197 Burn R, Mordasini C, Mishra L, et al (2024) A radius valley between migrated steam worlds and evaporated rocky cores. Nature Astronomy 8:463–471. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41550-023-02183-7 Byrne PK, Jozwiak LA, Treiman AH, et al (2021) Venus resurfacing: Constraints from crater densities, geomorphology, and stratigraphy. Nature Astronomy 5:1–9. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-021-01372-2 Byrne PK, Guimond CM, Cawood PA, et al (2026) What the Solar System Can Teach Us About Rocky Exoplanets. Space Sci. Rev., in press Byrne X, Shorttle O, Jordan S, et al (2024) Atmospheres as a window to rocky exoplanet surfaces. MNRAS527(4):10748–10759. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ stad3914, arXiv:2312.11133 [astro-ph.EP] 51 Carone L, Barnes R, Noack L, et al (2025) From co2-to h2o-dominated atmospheres and back-how mixed outgassing changes the volatile distribution in magma oceans around m dwarf stars. Astronomy & Astrophysics 693:A303 Carrasco N, Bourgalais J, Vettier L, et al (2022) A missing link in the nitrogen-rich organic chain on Titan. A&A663:A165. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/ 202141025 Catling DC, Kasting JF (2017) Atmospheric Evolution on Inhabited and Lifeless Worlds, 1st edn. Cambridge University Press Catling DC, Zahnle KJ (2020) The archean atmosphere. Science advances 6(9):eaax1420 Catling DC, Glein CR, Zahnle KJ, et al (2005) Why O 2 Is Required by Complex Life on Habitable Planets and the Concept of Planetary “Oxygenation Time”. Astrobiology 5(3):415–438. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2005.5.415 Catling DC, Krissansen-Totton J, Kiang NY, et al (2018) Exoplanet Biosignatures: A Framework for Their Assessment. Astrobiology 18(6):709–738. https://doi.org/10. 1089/ast.2017.1737 Chaffin M, Cangi E, Gregory B, et al (2024) Venus water loss is dominated by hco dissociative recombination. Nature 629:1–4. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41586-024-07261-y Chamberlain JW (1963) Planetary coronae and atmospheric evaporation. Planet. Space Sci.11(8):901–960. https://doi.org/10.1016/0032-0633(63)90122-3 Chappell CR (2015) The Role of the Ionosphere in Providing Plasma to the Terrestrial Magnetosphere—An Historical Overview. Space Sci. Rev.192(1-4):5–25. https://doi. org/10.1007/s11214-015-0168-5 Charbonneau D, Brown TM, Noyes RW, et al (2002) Detection of an Extrasolar Planet Atmosphere. ApJ568(1):377–384. https://doi.org/10.1086/338770 Charnay B, Le Hir G, Fluteau F, et al (2017) A warm or a cold early earth? new insights from a 3-d climate-carbon model. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 474:97–109 Chaufray JY, Bertaux JL, Quémerais E, et al (2012) Hydrogen density in the day-side venusian exosphere derived from Lyman-α observations by SPICAV on Venus Express. Icarus217(2):767–778. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2011.09.027 Chen GQ, Ahrens TJ (1997) Erosion of terrestrial planet atmosphere by surface motion after a large impact. Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 100(1-4):21–26 52 Chen J, Kipping D (2016) Probabilistic forecasting of the masses and radii of other worlds. The Astrophysical Journal 834(1):17 Cherubim C, Wordsworth R, Bower DJ, et al (2025) An Oxidation Gradient Straddling the Small Planet Radius Valley. ApJ983(2):97. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ adbca9 Chirakkil K, Deighan J, Chaffin MS, et al (2024) EMM EMUS Observations of Hot Oxygen Corona at Mars: Radial Distribution and Temporal Variability. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 129(3):e2023JA032342. https://doi.org/10. 1029/2023JA032342 Chyba CF (1990) Impact delivery and erosion of planetary oceans in the early inner Solar System. Nature343(6254):129–133. https://doi.org/10.1038/343129a0 Cockell CS, Bush T, Bryce C, et al (2016) Habitability: A Review. Astrobiology 16(1):89–117. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2015.1295 Cravens TE, Gombosi T, Nagy AF (1980) Hot hydrogen in the exosphere of Venus. Nature283(5743):178–180. https://doi.org/10.1038/283178a0 Cui, J., Wu, X. -S., Gu, H., et al (2019) Photochemical escape of atomic c and n on mars: clues from a multi-instrument maven dataset. A&A621:A23. https://doi.org/ 10.1051/0004-6361/201833749 Curry A, Booth R, Owen JE, et al (2024) The evolution of catastrophically evaporating rocky planets. MNRAS528(3):4314–4336. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stae191 Curry SM, Luhmann J, Ma Y, et al (2015) Comparative pick-up ion distributions at Mars and Venus: Consequences for atmospheric deposition and escape. Planet. Space Sci.115:35–47. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2015.03.026 Curry SM, Hara T, Luhmann JG, et al (2025) First direct observations of atmo-spheric sputtering at Mars. Science Advances 11(22):eadt1538. https://doi.org/10. 1126/sciadv.adt1538 Daly RT, Schultz PH (2018) The delivery of water by impacts from planetary accretion to present. Science Advances 4(4):eaar2632 Dandouras I, Blanc M, Fossati L, et al (2020) Future Missions Related to the Determination of the Elemental and Isotopic Composition of Earth, Moon and the Terrestrial Planets. Space Sci. Rev.216(8):121. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-020-00736-0 De La Haye V, Waite Jr. JH, Johnson RE, et al (2007) Cassini ion and neutral mass spectrometer data in titan’s upper atmosphere and exosphere: Observation of a suprathermal corona. Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics 112(A7). 53 https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/2006JA012222 Deighan J, Chaffin MS, Chaufray JY, et al (2015) MAVEN IUVS observation of the hot oxygen corona at Mars. Geophys. Res. Lett.42(21):9009–9014. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/2015GL065487 Del Genio AD, Kiang NY, Way MJ, et al (2019a) Albedos, equilibrium temperatures, and surface temperatures of habitable planets. The Astrophysical Journal 884(1):75 Del Genio AD, Way MJ, Amundsen DS, et al (2019b) Habitable climate scenarios for proxima centauri b with a dynamic ocean. Astrobiology 19(1):99–125 Demangeon ODS, Zapatero Osorio MR, Alibert Y, et al (2021) Warm terrestrial planet with half the mass of Venus transiting a nearby star. A&A653:A41. https://doi.org/ 10.1051/0004-6361/202140728 Deming D, Seager S, Richardson LJ, et al (2005) Infrared radiation from an extrasolar planet. Nature434(7034):740–743. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature03507, arXiv:astro-ph/0503554 [astro-ph] Demory BO, de Wit J, Lewis N, et al (2013) Inference of Inhomogeneous Clouds in an Exoplanet Atmosphere. ApJ776(2):L25. https://doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/776/2/ L25 Des Marais DJ, Harwit MO, Jucks KW, et al (2002) Remote sensing of planetary properties and biosignatures on extrasolar terrestrial planets. Astrobiology 2(2):153– 181 Dong Y, Fang X, Brain DA, et al (2015) Strong plume fluxes at Mars observed by MAVEN: An important planetary ion escape channel. Geophys. Res. Lett.42(21):8942–8950. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015GL065346 Dos Santos LA (2023) Observations of planetary winds and outflows. In: Vidotto AA, Fossati L, Vink JS (eds) Winds of Stars and Exoplanets, pp 56–71, https: //doi.org/10.1017/S1743921322004239, 2211.16243 Dos Santos LA, Lopez ED, Fossati L, et al (2025) Exoplanet Atmospheric Escape Observations with the Habitable Worlds Observatory. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2507.07124. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2507.07124 Doyle AE, Young ED, Klein B, et al (2019) Oxygen fugacities of extrasolar rocks: Evidence for an earth-like geochemistry of exoplanets. Science 366(6463):356–359 Drążkowska J, Bitsch B, Lambrechts M, et al (2023) Planet Formation Theory in the Era of ALMA and Kepler: from Pebbles to Exoplanets. In: Inutsuka S, Aikawa Y, Muto T, et al (eds) Protostars and Planets VII, p 717, https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.2203.09759 54 Ducrot E, Lagage PO, Min M, et al (2025) Combined analysis of the 12.8 and 15 μmjwst/miri eclipse observations of trappist-1 b. Nature Astronomy 9(3):358–369 Eager-Nash JK, Daines SJ, McDermott JW, et al (2024) Simulating biosignatures from pre-oxygen photosynthesizing life on TRAPPIST-1e. MNRAS531(1):468–494. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stae1142 Egger JA, Osborn HP, Kubyshkina D, et al (2024) Unveiling the internal structure and formation history of the three planets transiting HIP 29442 (TOI-469) with CHEOPS. A&A688:A223. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202450472 Ehrenreich D, Lecavelier Des Etangs A, Hébrard G, et al (2008) New observations of the extended hydrogen exosphere of the extrasolar planet HD 209458b. A&A483(3):933–937. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:200809460, arXiv:0803.1831 [astro-ph] Elkins-Tanton L (2008) Linked magma ocean solidification and atmospheric growth for earth and mars. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 271(1-4):181–191 Elkins-Tanton LT (2012) Magma oceans in the inner solar system. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 40(1):113–139 Erkaev NV, Kulikov YN, Lammer H, et al (2007) Roche lobe effects on the atmospheric loss from “Hot Jupiters”. A&A472(1):329–334. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361: 20066929 Erkaev NV, Lammer H, Odert P, et al (2016) EUV-driven mass-loss of protoplane-tary cores with hydrogen-dominated atmospheres: the influences of ionization and orbital distance. MNRAS460(2):1300–1309. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stw935, arXiv:1601.00452 [astro-ph.EP] Erkaev NV, Scherf M, Thaller SE, et al (2021) Escape and evolution of Titan’s N2 atmosphere constrained by 14 N/ 15 N isotope ratios. MNRAS500(2):2020–2035. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staa3151 Erkaev NV, Scherf M, Herbort O, et al (2023) Modification of the radioactive heat budget of Earth-like exoplanets by the loss of primordial atmospheres. MNRAS518(3):3703–3721. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stac3168 Evans TM, Pont F, Sing DK, et al (2013) The Deep Blue Color of HD 189733b: Albedo Measurements with Hubble Space Telescope/Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph at Visible Wavelengths. ApJ772(2):L16. https://doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/772/2/ L16 Fauchez TJ, Turbet M, Villanueva GL, et al (2019) Impact of clouds and hazes on the simulated jwst transmission spectra of habitable zone planets in the trappist-1 system. The Astrophysical Journal 887(2):194 55 Fedorov A, Barabash S, Sauvaud JA, et al (2011) Measurements of the ion escape rates from Venus for solar minimum. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 116(A7):A07220. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JA016427 Fegley B (2003) Venus. In: Holland HD, Turekian KK (eds) Treatise on Geochem-istry, vol 1. Elsevier, Oxford, p 487–507, https://doi.org/10.1016/B0-08-043751-6/ 01038-4 Ferraz-Mello S (2026) Exoplanet Synchronization in the Habitable Zone: Learn-ing from Venus’ Retrograde Rotation. AJ171(4):206. https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-3881/ae43e4, arXiv:2512.06526 [astro-ph.EP] Feulner G (2012) The faint young sun problem. Reviews of Geophysics 50(2) Feulner G, Bukenberger M, Petri S (2023) Tracing the snowball bifurcation of aqua-planets through time reveals a fundamental shift in critical-state dynamics. Earth System Dynamics 14(3):533–547 Foley BJ (2019) Habitability of Earth-like Stagnant Lid Planets: Climate Evolution and Recovery from Snowball States. The Astrophysical Journal 875(1):72. https: //doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab0f31 Foley BJ, Smye AJ (2018) Carbon Cycling and Habitability of Earth-Sized Stagnant Lid Planets. Astrobiology 18(7):873–896. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2017.1695 Fossati L, Erkaev NV, Lammer H, et al (2017) Aeronomical constraints to the min-imum mass and maximum radius of hot low-mass planets. A&A598:A90. https: //doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201629716 Fox J, Dalgarno A (1980) The production of nitrogen atoms on mars and their escape. Planetary and Space Science 28(1):41–46. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/ 0032-0633(80)90102-6 Fox JL, Hać A (1997) The 15 N/ 14 N isotope fractionation in dissociative recombination of N 2+. Journal of Geophysical Research 102(E4):9191–9204. https://doi.org/10. 1029/97JE00086 France K, Loyd ROP, Youngblood A, et al (2016) The MUSCLES Treasury Survey. I. Motivation and Overview. ApJ820(2):89. https://doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/820/ 2/89 Frost DJ, Liebske C, Langenhorst F, et al (2004) Experimental evidence for the exis-tence of iron-rich metal in the Earth’s lower mantle. Nature428(6981):409–412. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature02413 Fulton BJ, Petigura EA (2018) The California-Kepler Survey. VII. Precise Planet Radii Leveraging Gaia DR2 Reveal the Stellar Mass Dependence of the Planet Radius 56 Gap. AJ156(6):264. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/aae828 Fulton BJ, Petigura EA, Howard AW, et al (2017) The California-Kepler Survey. III. A Gap in the Radius Distribution of Small Planets. AJ154(3):109. https://doi.org/ 10.3847/1538-3881/aa80eb, arXiv:1703.10375 [astro-ph.EP] Fulton BJ, Petigura EA, Howard AW, et al (2017) The california-kepler survey. iii. a gap in the radius distribution of small planets. The Astronomical Journal 154(3):109 Fung J, Lee EJ (2018) Inner Super-Earths, Outer Gas Giants: How Pebble Isolation and Migration Feedback Keep Jupiters Cold. ApJ859(2):126. https://doi.org/10. 3847/1538-4357/aabaf7 Fuselier SA, Funsten HO, Heirtzler D, et al (2010) Energetic neutral atoms from the Earth’s subsolar magnetopause. Geophys. Res. Lett.37(13):L13101. https://doi.org/ 10.1029/2010GL044140 Gaillard F, Scaillet B (2009) The sulfur content of volcanic gases on mars. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 279(1-2):34–43 Gaillard F, Scaillet B (2014) A theoretical framework for volcanic degassing chem-istry in a comparative planetology perspective and implications for planetary atmospheres. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 403:307–316 Gaillard F, Scaillet B, Arndt NT (2011) Atmospheric oxygenation caused by a change in volcanic degassing pressure. Nature 478(7368):229–232 Gaillard F, Bouhifd MA, Füri E, et al (2021) The Diverse Planetary Ingassing/Out-gassing Paths Produced over Billions of Years of Magmatic Activity. Space Sci. Rev.217(1):22. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-021-00802-1 Gaillard F, Bernadou F, Roskosz M, et al (2022) Redox controls during magma ocean degassing. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 577:117255. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.epsl.2021.117255 Gaillard F, Malavergne V, Bouhifd MA, et al (2022) A speciation model linking the fate of carbon and hydrogen during core–magma ocean equilibration. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 577:117266 Gao P, Hu R, Robinson TD, et al (2015) Stability of CO2 Atmospheres on Desiccated M Dwarf Exoplanets. ApJ806(2):249. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/806/2/ 249 Gao P, Wakeford HR, Moran SE, et al (2021) Aerosols in Exoplanet Atmospheres. Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets) 126(4):e06655. https://doi.org/10.1029/ 2020JE006655 57 Geissler P, McMillan M (2008) Galileo observations of volcanic plumes on io. Icarus 197(2):505–518 Genda H, Abe Y (2005) Enhanced atmospheric loss on protoplanets at the giant impact phase in the presence of oceans. Nature 433(7028):842–844 Giggenbach WF (1996) Chemical Composition of Volcanic Gases, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 221–256. https://doi.org/10.1007/ 978-3-642-80087-0_7 Gillmann C, Chassefière E, Lognonné P (2009) A consistent picture of early hydro-dynamic escape of Venus atmosphere explaining present Ne and Ar isotopic ratios and low oxygen atmospheric content. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 286(3-4):503–513. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2009.07.016 Gillmann C, Lognonné P, Moreira M (2011) Volatiles in the atmosphere of mars: The effects of volcanism and escape constrained by isotopic data. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 303(3-4):299–309 Gillmann C, Way MJ, Avice G, et al (2022) The Long-Term Evolution of the Atmo-sphere of Venus: Processes and Feedback Mechanisms. Space Sci. Rev.218(7):56. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-022-00924-0 Ginzburg S, Chiang E (2019) The end of runaway: how gap opening limits the final masses of gas giants. MNRAS487(1):681–690. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/ stz1322 Ginzburg S, Schlichting HE, Sari R (2016) Super-Earth Atmospheres: Self-consistent Gas Accretion and Retention. ApJ825(1):29. https://doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/ 825/1/29 Ginzburg S, Schlichting HE, Sari R (2018) Core-powered mass-loss and the radius distribution of small exoplanets. MNRAS476(1):759–765. https://doi.org/10.1093/ mnras/sty290 Glein CR (2015) Noble gases, nitrogen, and methane from the deep interior to the atmosphere of Titan. Icarus250:570–586. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2015.01. 001 Goldblatt C, Zahnle KJ (2011a) Clouds and the faint young sun paradox. Climate of the Past 7(1):203–220 Goldblatt C, Zahnle KJ (2011b) Faint young sun paradox remains. Nature 474(7349):E1–E1 Goldblatt C, McDonald VL, McCusker KE (2021) Earth’s long-term climate stabilized by clouds. Nature Geoscience 14(3):143–150 58 Gómez-Leal I, Kaltenegger L, Lucarini V, et al (2019) Climate sensitivity to ozone and its relevance on the habitability of Earth-like planets. Icarus 321:608–618. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2018.11.019 Greene TP, Bell TJ, Ducrot E, et al (2023) Thermal emission from the Earth-sized exoplanet TRAPPIST-1 b using JWST. Nature618(7963):39–42. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41586-023-05951-7 Gregory BS, Elliott RD, Deighan J, et al (2023) HCO + Dissociative Recombination: A Significant Driver of Nonthermal Hydrogen Loss at Mars. Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets) 128(1):e2022JE007576. https://doi.org/10.1029/2022JE007576 Grenfell JL, Leconte J, Forget F, et al (2020) Possible Atmospheric Diversity of Low Mass Exoplanets - Some Central Aspects. Space Sci. Rev.216(5):98. https://doi. org/10.1007/s11214-020-00716-4 Gronoff G, Arras P, Baraka S, et al (2020) Atmospheric Escape Processes and Plan-etary Atmospheric Evolution. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 125(8):e27639. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JA02763910.1002/essoar.10502458.1 Güdel M (2015) Faint Young Sun Paradox, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp 837–843. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-44185-5_1700 Guimond CM, Spohn T, Berdyugina S, et al (2026) Water Versus Land on Temperate Rocky Planets. Space Sci. Rev.222(1):8. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-025-01264-5, arXiv:2512.09785 [astro-ph.EP] Gulcher AJ, Gerya T, Fournier AM, et al (2020) Consequences of stagnant lid con-vection on the volatile cycles of terrestrial planets. Nature Geoscience 13:548–554. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41561-020-0592-3 Gunell H, Maggiolo R, Nilsson H, et al (2018) Why an intrinsic magnetic field does not protect a planet against atmospheric escape. A&A614:L3. https://doi.org/10. 1051/0004-6361/201832934 Gupta A, Schlichting HE (2019) Sculpting the valley in the radius distribution of small exoplanets as a by-product of planet formation: the core-powered mass-loss mechanism. MNRAS487(1):24–33. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stz1230 Guzewich SD, Way MJ, Aleinov I, et al (2021) 3d simulations of the early mar-tian hydrological cycle mediated by a h2-co2 greenhouse. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 126(7):e2021JE006825 Haaland S, Eriksson A, Engwall E, et al (2012) Estimating the capture and loss of cold plasma from ionospheric outflow. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 117(A7):A07311. https://doi.org/10.1029/2012JA017679 59 Haberle RM, Zahnle K, Barlow NG, et al (2019) Impact degassing of h2 on early mars and its effect on the climate system. Geophysical Research Letters 46(22):13355– 13362 Hadid LZ, Delcourt D, Saito Y, et al (2024) BepiColombo observations of cold oxy-gen and carbon ions in the flank of the induced magnetosphere of Venus. Nature Astronomy 8:716–724. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-024-02247-2 Hamano K, Abe Y, Genda H (2013) Emergence of two types of terrestrial planet on solidification of magma ocean. Nature 497(7451):607–610 Hansen JE, Hovenier J (1974) Interpretation of the polarization of venus. J atmos Sci 31(4):1137–1160 Haqq-Misra JD, Domagal-Goldman SD, Kasting P, et al (2008) A revised, hazy methane greenhouse for the archean earth. Astrobiology 8(6):1127–1137 Harman C, Schwieterman E, Schottelkotte J, et al (2015) Abiotic o2 levels on planets around f, g, k, and m stars: Possible false positives for life? The Astrophysical Journal 812:137. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/812/2/137 Harman CE, Felton R, Hu R, et al (2018) Abiotic O 2 Levels on Planets around F, G, K, and M Stars: Effects of Lightning-produced Catalysts in Eliminating Oxygen False Positives. ApJ866(1):56. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aadd9b Harper CLJr., Jacobsen SB (1996) Noble Gases and Earth’s Accretion. Science 273(5283):1814–1818. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.273.5283.1814 Hartle RE, Grebowsky JM (1990) Upward ion flow in ionospheric holes on Venus. J. Geophys. Res.95(A1):31–37. https://doi.org/10.1029/JA095iA01p00031 Hashimoto GL, Abe Y, Sugita S (2007) The chemical composition of the early terres-trial atmosphere: Formation of a reducing atmosphere from ci-like material. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 112(E5) Hayashi C, Nakazawa K, Mizuno H (1979) Earth’s melting due to the blanketing effect of the primordial dense atmosphere. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 43(1):22–28 Heath MJ, Doyle LR, Joshi MM, et al (1999) Habitability of Planets Around Red Dwarf Stars. Origins of Life and Evolution of the Biosphere 29(4):405–424. https: //doi.org/10.1023/A:1006596718708 Heays AN, Kaiserová T, Rimmer PB, et al (2022) Nitrogen Oxide Production in Laser-Induced Breakdown Simulating Impacts on the Hadean Atmosphere. Jour-nal of Geophysical Research (Planets) 127(3):e06842. https://doi.org/10.1029/ 2021JE006842 60 Herbort O, Sereinig L (2025) The atmospheres of rocky exoplanets: III. Using atmo-spheric spectra to constrain surface rock composition. A&A699:A67. https://doi. org/10.1051/0004-6361/202453069, arXiv:2505.08883 [astro-ph.EP] Hier-Majumder S, Hirschmann MM (2017) The origin of volatiles in the Earth’s mantle. Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems 18(8):3078–3092. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/2017GC006937 Ho CSK, Van Eylen V (2023) A deep radius valley revealed by Kepler short cadence observations. MNRAS519(3):4056–4073. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stac3802 Hoffman PF, Schrag DP (2002) The snowball Earth hypothesis: Testing the limits of global change. Terra Nova 14(3):129–155. https://doi.org/10.1046/j.1365-3121. 2002.00408.x Hoffman PF, Kaufman AJ, Halverson GP, et al (1998) A Neoproterozoic Snowball Earth. Science 281(5381):1342–1346. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.281.5381.1342 Hoffman PF, Abbot DS, Ashkenazy Y, et al (2017) Snowball Earth climate dynamics and Cryogenian geology-geobiology. Science Advances 3(11):e1600983. https://doi. org/10.1126/sciadv.1600983 Hon M, Rappaport S, Shporer A, et al (2025) A Disintegrating Rocky Planet with Prominent Comet-like Tails around a Bright Star. ApJ984(1):L3. https://doi.org/ 10.3847/2041-8213/adbf21 Höning D, Tosi N, Spohn T (2019) Carbon cycling and interior evolution of water-covered plate tectonics and stagnant-lid planets. Astronomy & Astrophysics 627:A48. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201935091 Höning D, Baumeister P, Grenfell JL, et al (2021) Early Habitability and Crustal Decarbonation of a Stagnant-Lid Venus. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 126(10). https://doi.org/10.1029/2021JE006895 Hori Y, Ikoma M (2011) Gas giant formation with small cores triggered by envelope pollution by icy planetesimals. MNRAS416(2):1419–1429. https://doi.org/10.1111/ j.1365-2966.2011.19140.x Hu R, Delgado Diaz H (2019) Stability of Nitrogen in Planetary Atmospheres in Contact with Liquid Water. ApJ886(2):126. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ ab4cea Hu R, Thomas TB (2022) A nitrogen-rich atmosphere on ancient Mars consistent with isotopic evolution models. Nature Geoscience 15(2):106–111. https://doi.org/ 10.1038/s41561-021-00886-y 61 Hu R, Seager S, Bains W (2012) Photochemistry in Terrestrial Exoplanet Atmo-spheres. I. Photochemistry Model and Benchmark Cases. ApJ761(2):166. https: //doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/761/2/166, arXiv:1210.6885 [astro-ph.EP] Hu R, Bello-Arufe A, Zhang M, et al (2024) A secondary atmosphere on the rocky exoplanet 55 cancri e. Nature pp 1–2 Hu Y, Yang J (2014) Role of ocean heat transport in climates of tidally locked exo-planets around m dwarf stars. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 111(2):629–634 Hunten DM, Pepin RO, Walker JCG (1987) Mass fractionation in hydrodynamic escape. Icarus69(3):532–549. https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(87)90022-4 Hyde WT, Crowley TJ, Baum SK, et al (2000) Neoproterozoic ‘snowball Earth’ simulations with a coupled climate/ice-sheet model. Nature 405(6785):425–429. https://doi.org/10.1038/35013005 Ikoma M, Genda H (2006) Constraints on the Mass of a Habitable Planet with Water of Nebular Origin. ApJ648(1):696–706. https://doi.org/10.1086/505780 Ikoma M, Hori Y (2012) In Situ Accretion of Hydrogen-rich Atmospheres on Short-period Super-Earths: Implications for the Kepler-11 Planets. ApJ753(1):66. https: //doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/753/1/66, arXiv:1204.5302 [astro-ph.EP] Ikoma M, Nakazawa K, Emori H (2000) Formation of Giant Planets: Dependences on Core Accretion Rate and Grain Opacity. ApJ537(2):1013–1025. https://doi.org/10. 1086/309050 Ikoma M, Elkins-Tanton L, Hamano K, et al (2018) Water Partitioning in Planetary Embryos and Protoplanets with Magma Oceans. Space Sci. Rev.214(4):76. https: //doi.org/10.1007/s11214-018-0508-3 Ingersoll AP (1969) The Runaway Greenhouse: A History of Water on Venus. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 26(6):1191–1198. https://doi.org/10.1175/ 1520-0469(1969)026<1191:TRGAHO>2.0.CO;2 Inui S, Seki K, Sakai S, et al (2019) Statistical Study of Heavy Ion Outflows From Mars Observed in the Martian-Induced Magnetotail by MAVEN. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 124(7):5482–5497. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JA026452 Jackson AP, Davis TA, Wheatley PJ (2012) The coronal X-ray-age relation and its implications for the evaporation of exoplanets. MNRAS422(3):2024–2043. https: //doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20657.x Jakosky BM, Brain D, Chaffin M, et al (2018) Loss of the Martian atmosphere to space: Present-day loss rates determined from MAVEN observations and integrated 62 loss through time. Icarus315:146–157. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2018.05.030 Jaziri AY, Sohier O, Venot O, et al (2025) Unraveling the non-equilibrium chemistry of the temperate sub-Neptune K2-18 b. A&A701:A33. https://doi.org/10.1051/ 0004-6361/202555496 Jeans JH (1955) The dynamical theory of gases. Dover Publications Jin S, Mordasini C (2018) Compositional Imprints in Density-Distance-Time: A Rocky Composition for Close-in Low-mass Exoplanets from the Location of the Valley of Evaporation. ApJ853(2):163. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aa9f1e, arXiv:1706.00251 [astro-ph.EP] Johansen A, Ronnet T, Bizzarro M, et al (2021) A pebble accretion model for the formation of the terrestrial planets in the Solar System. Science Advances 7(8):eabc0444. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.abc0444 Johnstone CP (2020) Hydrodynamic Escape of Water Vapor Atmospheres near Very Active Stars. ApJ890(1):79. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab6224 Johnstone CP, Güdel M, Lammer H, et al (2018) Upper atmospheres of terrestrial plan-ets: Carbon dioxide cooling and the Earth’s thermospheric evolution. A&A617:A107. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201832776, arXiv:1806.06897 [astro-ph.EP] Johnstone CP, Bartel M, Güdel M (2021a) The active lives of stars: A complete descrip-tion of the rotation and XUV evolution of F, G, K, and M dwarfs. A&A649:A96. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202038407 Johnstone CP, Lammer H, Kislyakova KG, et al (2021b) The young Sun’s XUV-activity as a constraint for lower CO 2-limits in the Earth’s Archean atmosphere. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 576:117197. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl. 2021.117197 Joshi M (2003) Climate model studies of synchronously rotating planets. Astrobiology 3(2):415–427 Kamada A, Kuroda T, Kasaba Y, et al (2020) A coupled atmosphere–hydrosphere global climate model of early mars: A ‘cool and wet’scenario for the formation of water channels. Icarus 338:113567 Kanzaki Y, Murakami T (2015) Estimates of atmospheric CO 2 in the Neoarchean-Paleoproterozoic from paleosols. Geochimica Cosmochimica Acta159:190–219. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.gca.2015.03.011 Kasting JF (1988) Runaway and moist greenhouse atmospheres and the evolution of Earth and Venus. Icarus 74(3):472–494. https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(88) 90116-9 63 Kasting JF (2010) Faint young sun redux. Nature 464(7289):687–689 Kasting JF, Catling D (2003) Evolution of a habitable planet. Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 41(1):429–463 Kasting JF, Whitmire DP, Reynolds RT (1993) Habitable zones around main sequence stars. Icarus 101(1):108–128. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.1993.1010 Katyal N, Ortenzi G, Lee Grenfell J, et al (2020) Effect of mantle oxidation state and escape upon the evolution of Earth’s magma ocean atmosphere. A&A643:A81. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202038779 Kaula WM (1999) Constraints on Venus Evolution from Radiogenic Argon. Icarus139(1):32–39. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.1999.6082 Kegerreis J, Eke V, Massey R, et al (2020) Atmospheric erosion by giant impacts onto terrestrial planets. The Astrophysical Journal 897(2):161 Keika K, Nosé M, Brandt PC, et al (2006) Contribution of charge exchange loss to the storm time ring current decay: IMAGE/HENA observations. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 111(A11):A11S12. https://doi.org/10.1029/ 2006JA011789 Kempton EMR, Knutson HA (2024) Transiting Exoplanet Atmospheres in the Era of JWST. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry 90(1):411–464. https://doi.org/ 10.2138/rmg.2024.90.12 Kim J, Nagy AF, Fox JL, et al (1998) Solar cycle variability of hot oxygen atoms at Mars. Journal of Geophysical Research 103(A12):29339–29342. https://doi.org/10. 1029/98JA02727 King MD, Platnick S, Menzel WP, et al (2013) Spatial and temporal distribution of clouds observed by modis onboard the terra and aqua satellites. IEEE Transac-tions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing 51(7):3826–3852. https://doi.org/10.1109/ TGRS.2012.2227333 Kirk J, Dos Santos LA, López-Morales M, et al (2022) Keck/NIRSPEC Studies of He I in the Atmospheres of Two Inflated Hot Gas Giants Orbiting K Dwarfs: WASP-52b and WASP-177b. AJ164(1):24. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ac722f Kite ES, Barnett MN (2020) Exoplanet secondary atmosphere loss and revival. Pro-ceedings of the National Academy of Science 117:18264–18271. https://doi.org/10. 1073/pnas.2006177117 Kite ES, Fegley Jr B, Schaefer L, et al (2016) Atmosphere-interior exchange on hot, rocky exoplanets. The Astrophysical Journal 828(2):80 64 Knutson HA, Charbonneau D, Allen LE, et al (2007) A map of the day-night contrast of the extrasolar planet HD 189733b. Nature447(7141):183–186. https://doi.org/10. 1038/nature05782 Kobayashi K, Airapetian VS, Udo T, et al (2026) Proton Irradiation of Primitive Atmospheres of Young Exoplanets and early Earth: N2O Greenhouse Warming and Prebiotic Synthesis. arXiv e-prints arXiv:2603.18206. https://doi.org/10.48550/ arXiv.2603.18206, arXiv:2603.18206 [astro-ph.EP] Komabayasi M (1967) Discrete Equilibrium Temperatures of a Hypothetical Planet with the Atmosphere and the Hydrosphere of One Component-Two Phase System under Constant Solar Radiation. Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan Ser II 45(1):137–139. https://doi.org/10.2151/jmsj1965.45.1_137 Kopparapu RK, Ramirez R, Kasting JF, et al (2013) Habitable zones around main-sequence stars: New estimates. The Astrophysical Journal 765(2):131. https://doi. org/10.1088/0004-637X/765/2/131 Kreidberg L, Bean JL, Désert JM, et al (2014) Clouds in the atmosphere of the super-Earth exoplanet GJ1214b. Nature505(7481):69–72. https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature12888 Kreidberg L, Koll DDB, Morley C, et al (2019) Absence of a thick atmosphere on the terrestrial exoplanet LHS 3844b. Nature573(7772):87–90. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41586-019-1497-4 Krissansen-Totton J, Fortney JJ, Nimmo F (2021) Was venus ever habitable? con-straints from a coupled interior–atmosphere–redox evolution model. The Planetary Science Journal 2(5):216 Krissansen-Totton J, Galloway ML, Wogan N, et al (2021) Waterworlds Probably Do Not Experience Magmatic Outgassing. ApJ913(2):107. https://doi.org/10.3847/ 1538-4357/abf560 Krissansen-Totton J, Thompson M, Galloway ML, et al (2022) Understanding plan-etary context to enable life detection on exoplanets and test the Copernican prin-ciple. Nature Astronomy 6:189–198. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-021-01579-7, arXiv:2202.10333 [astro-ph.EP] Krissansen-Totton J, Wogan N, Thompson M, et al (2024) The erosion of large pri-mary atmospheres typically leaves behind substantial secondary atmospheres on temperate rocky planets. Nature Communications 15(1):8374. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41467-024-52642-6 Kubyshkina D, Fossati L, Erkaev NV, et al (2018) Grid of upper atmosphere models for 1-40 M ⊕ planets: application to CoRoT-7 b and HD 219134 b,c. A&A619:A151. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201833737, arXiv:1809.06645 [astro-ph.EP] 65 Kubyshkina D, Way MJ, Dandouras I, et al (2026) Upper Atmosphere Dynam-ics and Drivers of Volatiles Loss from Terrestrial-Type (Exo)Planets. Space Sci. Rev.222(3):28. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-026-01283-w, arXiv:2602.15507 [astro-ph.EP] Kurokawa H, Kurosawa K, Usui T (2018) A lower limit of atmospheric pressure on early Mars inferred from nitrogen and argon isotopic compositions. Icarus299:443– 459. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2017.08.020 Lacedelli G, Pallé E, Luque R, et al (2024) Characterisation of TOI-406 as a showcase of the THIRSTEE program: A two-planet system straddling the M-dwarf density gap. A&A692:A238. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202452244 Lagage PO, Mandell A, Giménez A, et al (2026) The Future of Rocky Worlds Exploration. Space Sci. Rev.222(4):40. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-026-01297-4 Lambrechts M, Johansen A, Morbidelli A (2014) Separating gas-giant and ice-giant planets by halting pebble accretion. A&A572:A35. https://doi.org/10.1051/ 0004-6361/201423814 Lammer H, Lichtenegger HIM, Biernat HK, et al (2006) Loss of hydrogen and oxygen from the upper atmosphere of Venus. Planet. Space Sci.54(13-14):1445–1456. https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2006.04.022 Lammer H, Zerkle AL, Gebauer S, et al (2018) Origin and evolution of the atmo-spheres of early Venus, Earth and Mars. A&ARv26(1):2. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s00159-018-0108-y Lammer H, Scherf M, Kurokawa H, et al (2020) Loss and Fractionation of Noble Gas Isotopes and Moderately Volatile Elements from Planetary Embryos and Early Venus, Earth and Mars. Space Sci. Rev.216(4):74. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-020-00701-x Lammer H, Brasser R, Johansen A, et al (2021) Formation of Venus, Earth and Mars: Constrained by Isotopes. Space Sci. Rev.217(1):7. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-020-00778-4, arXiv:2102.06173 [astro-ph.EP] Lammer H, Scherf M, Sproß L (2024) Eta-Earth Revisited I: A Formula for Estimating the Maximum Number of Earth-Like Habitats. Astrobiology 24(10):897–915. https: //doi.org/10.1089/ast.2023.0075 Laneuville M, Kameya M, Cleaves HJII (2018) Earth Without Life: A Systems Model of a Global Abiotic Nitrogen Cycle. Astrobiology 18(7):897–914. https://doi.org/ 10.1089/ast.2017.1700 Lavvas P, Coustenis A, Vardavas I (2008) Coupling photochemistry with haze for-mation in titan’s atmosphere, part ii: Results and validation with cassini/huygens 66 data. Planetary and Space Science 56(1):67–99. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.pss.2007.05.027 Leblanc F, Modolo R, Curry S, et al (2015) Mars heavy ion precipitating flux as mea-sured by Mars Atmosphere and Volatile EvolutioN. Geophys. Res. Lett.42(21):9135– 9141. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015GL066170 Leblanc F, Martinez A, Chaufray JY, et al (2018) On Mars’s Atmospheric Sput-tering After MAVEN’s First Martian Year of Measurements. Geophys. Res. Lett.45(10):4685–4691. https://doi.org/10.1002/2018GL077199 Lebrun T, Massol H, ChassefièRe E, et al (2013) Thermal evolution of an early magma ocean in interaction with the atmosphere. Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets) 118:1155–1176. https://doi.org/10.1002/jgre.20068 Leconte J, Forget F, Charnay B, et al (2013) Increased insolation threshold for runaway greenhouse processes on Earth-like planets. Nature 504(7479):268–271. https://doi. org/10.1038/nature12827 Leconte J, Wu H, Menou K, et al (2015) Asynchronous rotation of Earth-mass planets in the habitable zone of lower-mass stars. Science 347(6222):632–635. https://doi. org/10.1126/science.1258686, arXiv:1502.01952 [astro-ph.EP] Ledvina SA, Brecht SH, Brain DA, et al (2017) Ion escape rates from mars: Results from hybrid simulations compared to maven observations. Journal of Geophysi-cal Research: Space Physics 122(8):8391–8408. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10. 1002/2016JA023521 Lee EJ, Chiang E (2015) To Cool is to Accrete: Analytic Scalings for Nebular Accretion of Planetary Atmospheres. ApJ811(1):41. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/811/ 1/41, arXiv:1508.05096 [astro-ph.EP] Lee EJ, Chiang E (2016) Breeding Super-Earths and Birthing Super-puffs in Transi-tional Disks. ApJ817(2):90. https://doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/817/2/90 Lee EJ, Connors NJ (2021) Primordial Radius Gap and Potentially Broad Core Mass Distributions of Super-Earths and Sub-Neptunes. ApJ908(1):32. https://doi.org/ 10.3847/1538-4357/abd6c7 Lee EJ, Chiang E, Ormel CW (2014) Make Super-Earths, Not Jupiters: Accreting Nebular Gas onto Solid Cores at 0.1 AU and Beyond. ApJ797(2):95. https://doi. org/10.1088/0004-637X/797/2/95 Lee EJ, Karalis A, Thorngren DP (2022) Creating the Radius Gap without Mass Loss. ApJ941(2):186. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac9c66 67 Léger A, Fontecave M, Labeyrie A, et al (2011) Is the presence of oxygen on an exoplanet a reliable biosignature? Astrobiology 11(4):335–341 Lehmer OR, Catling DC, Buick R, et al (2020) Atmospheric CO2 levels from 2.7 billion years ago inferred from micrometeorite oxidation. Science Advances 6(4):eaay4644. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aay4644 Lehmer OR, Catling DC, Krissansen-Totton J (2020) Carbonate-silicate cycle pre-dictions of Earth-like planetary climates and testing the habitable zone concept. Nature Communications 11(1):6153. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-19896-2 Li H, He C, Wang S, et al (2025) The Impact of Organic Hazes and Graphite on the Observation of CO 2-rich Sub-Neptune Atmospheres. ApJ990(2):L66. https://doi. org/10.3847/2041-8213/adfa87 Li Y (2024) The origin and evolution of Earth’s nitrogen. National Science Review 11(6):nwae201. https://doi.org/10.1093/nsr/nwae201 Lichtenegger HIM, Dyadechkin S, Scherf M, et al (2022) Non-thermal escape of the martian CO 2 atmosphere over time: Constrained by Ar isotopes. Icarus382:115009. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115009 Liggins P, Jordan S, Rimmer PB, et al (2022) Growth and evolution of secondary volcanic atmospheres: I. identifying the geological character of hot rocky planets. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 127(7):e2021JE007123 Lillis RJ, Deighan J, Fox JL, et al (2017a) Photochemical escape of oxygen from Mars: First results from MAVEN in situ data. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 122(3):3815–3836. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JA023525 Lillis RJ, Deighan J, Fox JL, et al (2017b) Photochemical escape of oxygen from Mars: First results from MAVEN in situ data. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 122(3):3815–3836. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JA023525 Lin MY, Ilie R, Glocer A (2020) The contribution of n+ ions to earth’s polar wind. Geophysical Research Letters 47(18):e2020GL089321. https://doi.org/https://doi. org/10.1029/2020GL089321 Lingam M (2020) Implications of Abiotic Oxygen Buildup for Earth-like Complex Life. AJ159(4):144. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ab737f Linsky J (2025) Host Stars and Their Effects on Exoplanet Atmospheres: An Intro-ductory Overview. Astrophysics and Space Science Library, Springer, URL https: //books.google.at/books?id=FSrl0AEACAAJ Linsky JL, Yang H, France K, et al (2010) Observations of Mass Loss from the Transiting Exoplanet HD 209458b. ApJ717(2):1291–1299. https://doi.org/10.1088/ 68 0004-637X/717/2/1291 Lock SJ, Stewart ST (2024) Atmospheric loss in giant impacts depends on preimpact surface conditions. The Planetary Science Journal 5(2):28 Lockley IS, Armstrong DJ, Fernández Fernández J, et al (2025) The TOI-1117 mul-tiplanetary system: 3 sub-Neptunes, 1 in both the Neptunian Desert and Radius Valley. MNRAS541(2):919–938. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/staf939 Lodders K, Fegley B (2024) Sulfur in the giant planets, their moons, and extrasolar gas giant planets. arXiv preprint arXiv:241011138 Lopez ED, Fortney JJ, Miller N (2012) How Thermal Evolution and Mass-loss Sculpt Populations of Super-Earths and Sub-Neptunes: Application to the Kepler-11 System and Beyond. ApJ761(1):59. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/761/1/59 Lorenz RD, Lunine JI, McKay CP (1997) Titan under a red giant sun: A new kind of “habitable” moon. Geophysical Research Letters 24(22):2905–2908. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1029/97GL52843, URL https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1029/97GL52843, https://agupubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1029/97GL52843 Loyd ROP, France K, Youngblood A, et al (2016) The MUSCLES Treasury Survey. III. X-Ray to Infrared Spectra of 11 M and K Stars Hosting Planets. ApJ824(2):102. https://doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/824/2/102 Luger R, Barnes R (2015) Extreme water loss and abiotic o2 buildup on planets throughout the habitable zones of m dwarfs. Astrobiology 15(2):119–143 Luhmann JG, Kozyra JU (1991) Dayside pickup oxygen ion precipitation at Venus and Mars: Spatial distributions, energy deposition and consequences. Journal of Geophysical Research 96(A4):5457–5467. https://doi.org/10.1029/90JA01753 Luhmann JG, Ledvina SA, Russell CT (2004) Induced magnetospheres. Advances in Space Research 33(11):1905–1912. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asr.2003.03.031 Luisi PL (2016) The Emergence of Life: From Chemical Origins to Synthetic Biology, 2nd edn. Cambridge University Press Lundin R, Barabash S, Holmström M, et al (2013) Solar cycle effects on the ion escape from mars. Geophysical Research Letters 40(23):6028–6032. https://doi.org/https: //doi.org/10.1002/2013GL058154 Luque R, Pallé E (2022) Density, not radius, separates rocky and water-rich small planets orbiting M dwarf stars. Science 377(6611):1211–1214. https://doi.org/10. 1126/science.abl7164 69 Luspay-Kuti A, Mandt K (eds) (2025) Triton and Pluto. 2514-3433, IOP Publishing, https://doi.org/10.1088/2514-3433/ad5278 Lyons TW, Reinhard CT, Planavsky NJ (2014) The rise of oxygen in Earth’s early ocean and atmosphere. Nature506(7488):307–315. https://doi.org/10.1038/ nature13068 Macdonald E, Paradise A, Menou K, et al (2022) Climate uncertainties caused by unknown land distribution on habitable M-Earths. MNRAS513(2):2761–2769. https: //doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stac1040, arXiv:2110.04310 [astro-ph.EP] MacKenzie SM, Birch SP, Hörst S, et al (2021) Titan: Earth-like on the outside, ocean world on the inside. The Planetary Science Journal 2(3):112 Madhusudhan N, Agúndez M, Moses JI, et al (2016) Exoplanetary Atmo-spheres—Chemistry, Formation Conditions, and Habitability. Space Sci. Rev.205(1-4):285–348. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-016-0254-3 Madhusudhan N, Holmberg M, Constantinou S, et al (2025) Exploring the sub-Neptune frontier with JWST. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 122(39):e2416194122. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2416194122 Mahapatra G, Helling C, Miguel Y (2017) Cloud formation in metal-rich atmospheres of hot super-Earths like 55 Cnc e and CoRoT7b. MNRAS472(1):447–464. https: //doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stx1666 Mak MT, Mayne NJ, Sergeev DE, et al (2023) 3D Simulations of the Archean Earth Including Photochemical Haze Profiles. Journal of Geophysical Research (Atmospheres) 128(20):e2023JD039343. https://doi.org/10.1029/2023JD039343 Mak MT, Sergeev DE, Mayne N, et al (2024) 3D simulations of TRAPPIST-1e with varying CO 2, CH 4, and haze profiles. MNRAS529(4):3971–3987. https://doi.org/ 10.1093/mnras/stae741, arXiv:2403.06928 [astro-ph.EP] Mallik A, Li Y, Wiedenbeck M (2018) Nitrogen evolution within the Earth’s atmosphere-mantle system assessed by recycling in subduction zones. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 482:556–566. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2017.11.045 Malsky I, Rogers LA (2020) Coupled Thermal and Compositional Evolution of Photo-evaporating Planet Envelopes. ApJ896(1):48. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ ab873f Marcq E (2018) A simple model for the CO2 photochemistry in the upper atmosphere of venus. Icarus 307:308–315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2018.02.024 70 Marley MS, Ackerman AS, Cuzzi JN, et al (2013) Clouds and Hazes in Exoplanet Atmospheres. In: Mackwell SJ, Simon-Miller AA, Harder JW, et al (eds) Compar-ative Climatology of Terrestrial Planets. p 367–392, https://doi.org/10.2458/azu_ uapress_9780816530595-ch015 Marois C, Zuckerman B, Konopacky QM, et al (2010) Images of a fourth planet orbit-ing HR 8799. Nature468(7327):1080–1083. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature09684, arXiv:1011.4918 [astro-ph.EP] Marty B (2012) The origins and concentrations of water, carbon, nitrogen and noble gases on Earth. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 313:56–66. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.epsl.2011.10.040 Marty B, Zimmermann L, Pujol M, et al (2013) Nitrogen Isotopic Composition and Density of the Archean Atmosphere. Science 342(6154):101–104. https://doi.org/ 10.1126/science.1240971 Maruyama S, Santosh M (2008) Models on Snowball Earth and Cambrian explosion: A synopsis. Gondwana Research 14(1-2):22–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gr.2008. 01.004 Matsui T, Abe Y (1986) Impact-induced atmospheres and oceans on Earth and Venus. Nature322(6079):526–528. https://doi.org/10.1038/322526a0 Maurice M, Dasgupta R, Hassanzadeh P (2024) Volatile atmospheres of lava worlds. A&A688:A47. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202347749 Mayor M, Queloz D (1995) A Jupiter-mass companion to a solar-type star. Nature378(6555):355–359. https://doi.org/10.1038/378355a0 McDonald GD, Kreidberg L, Lopez E (2019) The Sub-Neptune Desert and Its Depen-dence on Stellar Type: Controlled by Lifetime X-Ray Irradiation. ApJ876(1):22. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab1095, arXiv:2105.00142 [astro-ph.EP] Meadows VS (2017) Reflections on o2 as a biosignature in exoplanetary atmospheres. Astrobiology 17(10):1022–1052 Meadows VS, Reinhard CT, Arney GN, et al (2018) Exoplanet Biosignatures: Under-standing Oxygen as a Biosignature in the Context of Its Environment. Astrobiology 18(6):630–662. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2017.1727 Meier R, Anderson G, Cantrell C, et al (1997) Actinic radiation in the terrestrial atmo-sphere. Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics 59(17):2111–2157. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S1364-6826(97)00047-3 Meier Valdés EA, Demory BO, Diamond-Lowe H, et al (2025) Hot Rocks Survey: II. The thermal emission of TOI-1468 b reveals a bare hot rock. A&A698:A68. 71 https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202453449, arXiv:2503.19772 [astro-ph.EP] Mikhail S, Sverjensky DA (2014) Nitrogen speciation in upper mantle fluids and the origin of Earth’s nitrogen-rich atmosphere. Nature Geoscience 7(11):816–819. https: //doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2271 Miller KE, Glein CR, Waite JHJr. (2019) Contributions from Accreted Organ-ics to Titan’s Atmosphere: New Insights from Cometary and Chondritic Data. ApJ871(1):59. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aaf561 Miller SL, Urey HC (1959) Organic compound synthesis on the primitive earth: Several questions about the origin of life have been answered, but much remains to be studied. Science 130(3370):245–251 Misener W, Schulik M, Schlichting HE, et al (2025) Blowin’ in the Nonisother-mal Wind: Core-powered Mass Loss with Hydrodynamic Radiative Transfer. ApJ980(1):152. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ada777 Mizuno H, Nakazawa K, Hayashi C (1980) Dissolution of the primordial rare gases into the molten Earth’s material. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 50(1):202–210. https://doi.org/10.1016/0012-821X(80)90131-4 Mol Lous M, Mordasini C, Helled R (2024) Accretion of primordial H-He atmospheres in mini-Neptunes: The importance of envelope enrichment. A&A685:A22. https: //doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202349039 Moldenhauer TW, Kuiper R, Kley W, et al (2022) Recycling of the first atmospheres of embedded planets: Dependence on core mass and optical depth. A&A661:A142. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202141955 Morbidelli A, Lambrechts M, Jacobson S, et al (2015) The great dichotomy of the Solar System: Small terrestrial embryos and massive giant planet cores. Icarus258:418– 429. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2015.06.003 Mordasini C (2014) Grain opacity and the bulk composition of extrasolar plan-ets. II. An analytical model for grain opacity in protoplanetary atmospheres. A&A572:A118. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201423702 Mordasini C (2020) Planetary evolution with atmospheric photoevaporation. I. Ana-lytical derivation and numerical study of the evaporation valley and transition from super-Earths to sub-Neptunes. A&A638:A52. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/ 201935541 Moreira M, Charnoz S (2016) The origin of the neon isotopes in chondrites and on Earth. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 433:249–256. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.epsl.2015.11.002 72 Mukhopadhyay S (2012) Early differentiation and volatile accretion recorded in deep-mantle neon and xenon. Nature 486(7401):101–104 Nagy AF, Cravens TE, Yee JH, et al (1981) Hot oxygen atoms in the upper atmosphere of Venus. Geophys. Res. Lett.8(6):629–632. https://doi.org/10.1029/ GL008i006p00629 Nakajima S, Hayashi YY, Abe Y (1992) A Study on the “Runaway Greenhouse Effect” with a One-Dimensional Radiative–Convective Equilibrium Model. Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences 49(23):2256–2266. https://doi.org/10.1175/1520-0469(1992) 049<2256:ASOTGE>2.0.CO;2 Nakayama A, Ikoma M, Terada N (2022) Survival of Terrestrial N 2-O 2 Atmospheres in Violent XUV Environments through Efficient Atomic Line Radiative Cooling. ApJ937(2):72. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac86ca Narita N, Enomoto T, Masaoka S, et al (2015) Titania may produce abiotic oxygen atmospheres on habitable exoplanets. Scientific reports 5(1):13977 Navarro-González R, Molina MJ, Molina LT (1998) Nitrogen fixation by volcanic lightning in the early Earth. Geophys. Res. Lett.25(16):3123–3126. https://doi.org/ 10.1029/98GL02423 Navarro-González R, McKay CP, Mvondo DN (2001) A possible nitrogen crisis for Archaean life due to reduced nitrogen fixation by lightning. Nature412(6842):61–64. https://doi.org/10.1038/35083537 Nicholls H, Lichtenberg T, Bower DJ, et al (2024) Magma Ocean Evolu-tion at Arbitrary Redox State. Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets) 129(12):2024JE008576. https://doi.org/10.1029/2024JE008576 Nicholls H, Lichtenberg T, Chatterjee RD, et al (2026) Volatile-rich evolution of molten super-Earth L 98-59 d. Nature Astronomy 10:809–817. https://doi.org/10.1038/ s41550-026-02815-8, arXiv:2507.02656 [astro-ph.EP] Nielsen J, Johansen A, Bali K, et al (2025) A primordial radius valley as a consequence of planet formation. A&A695:A184. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202450326 Nikolaou A, Katyal N, Tosi N, et al (2019) What factors affect the duration and outgassing of the terrestrial magma ocean? The Astrophysical Journal 875(1):11 Nilsson H, Stenberg G, Futaana Y, et al (2012) Ion distributions in the vicinity of Mars: Signatures of heating and acceleration processes. Earth, Planets and Space 64(2):135–148. https://doi.org/10.5047/eps.2011.04.011 Noack L, Lasbleis M (2020) Parameterisations of interior properties of rocky planets-an investigation of planets with earth-like compositions but variable iron content. 73 Astronomy & Astrophysics 638:A129 Noack L, Breuer D, Spohn T (2012) Coupling the atmosphere with interior dynamics: Implications for the resurfacing of venus. Icarus 217(2):484–498 Odert P, Lammer H, Erkaev NV, et al (2018) Escape and fractionation of volatiles and noble gases from Mars-sized planetary embryos and growing protoplanets. Icarus307:327–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2017.10.031 Olson PL, Sharp ZD (2019) Nebular atmosphere to magma ocean: A model for volatile capture during Earth accretion. Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors 294:106294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pepi.2019.106294 Ormel CW (2014) An atmospheric structure equation for grain growth. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 789. URL https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 119261293 Ormel CW, Shi JM, Kuiper R (2015) Hydrodynamics of embedded planets’ first atmospheres - II. A rapid recycling of atmospheric gas. MNRAS447(4):3512–3525. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stu2704 O’Rourke JG, Korenaga J (2015) Thermal evolution of Venus with argon degassing. Icarus260:128–140. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2015.07.009 Ortenzi G, Noack L, Sohl F, et al (2020) Mantle redox state drives outgassing chemistry and atmospheric composition of rocky planets. Scientific reports 10(1):10907 Osborne HLM, Van Eylen V, Goffo E, et al (2024) TOI-544 b: a potential water-world inside the radius valley in a two-planet system. MNRAS527(4):11138–11157. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stad3837 Owen JE, Campos Estrada B (2020) Testing exoplanet evaporation with multitran-siting systems. MNRAS491(4):5287–5297. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stz3435 Owen JE, Jackson AP (2012) Planetary evaporation by UV & X-ray radia-tion: basic hydrodynamics. MNRAS425(4):2931–2947. https://doi.org/10.1111/j. 1365-2966.2012.21481.x Owen JE, Mohanty S (2016) Habitability of terrestrial-mass planets in the HZ of M Dwarfs - I. H/He-dominated atmospheres. MNRAS459(4):4088–4108. https://doi. org/10.1093/mnras/stw959 Owen JE, Wu Y (2013) Kepler Planets: A Tale of Evaporation. ApJ775(2):105. https: //doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/775/2/105 Owen JE, Wu Y (2016) Atmospheres of Low-mass Planets: The “Boil-off”. ApJ817(2):107. https://doi.org/10.3847/0004-637X/817/2/107 74 Owen JE, Wu Y (2017) The Evaporation Valley in the Kepler Planets. ApJ847(1):29. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/aa890a O’Rourke JG, Wilson CF, Borrelli ME, et al (2023) Venus, the planet: Introduction to the evolution of earth’s sister planet. Space Science Reviews 219(1):10 Parc L, Bouchy F, Venturini J, et al (2024) From super-Earths to sub-Neptunes: Observational constraints and connections to theoretical models. A&A688:A59. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202449911, arXiv:2406.04311 [astro-ph.EP] Parker EN (1965) Dynamical Theory of the Solar Wind. Space Sci. Rev.4(5-6):666–708. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00216273 Pavlov AA, Brown LL, Kasting JF (2001) UV shielding of NH 3 and O 2 by organic hazes in the Archean atmosphere. Journal of Geophysical Research 106(E10):23267– 23288. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JE001448 Payne JL, Boyer AG, Brown JH, et al (2009) Two-phase increase in the maximum size of life over 3.5 billion years reflects biological innovation and environmental opportunity. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 106(1):24–27 Perez-Becker D, Chiang E (2013) Catastrophic evaporation of rocky planets. MNRAS433(3):2294–2309. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stt895 Péron S, Moreira M, Colin A, et al (2016) Neon isotopic composition of the mantle constrained by single vesicle analyses. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 449:145– 154. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2016.05.052 Persson M, Futaana Y, Fedorov A, et al (2018) H +/O + Escape Rate Ratio in the Venus Magnetotail and its Dependence on the Solar Cycle. Geophysical Research Letters 45(20):10,805–10,811. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018GL079454 Petigura EA, Rogers JG, Isaacson H, et al (2022) The California-Kepler Survey. X. The Radius Gap as a Function of Stellar Mass, Metallicity, and Age. AJ163(4):179. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ac51e3, arXiv:2201.10020 [astro-ph.EP] Piaulet C, Benneke B, Almenara JM, et al (2023) Evidence for the volatile-rich composition of a 1.5-Earth-radius planet. Nature Astronomy 7:206–222. https: //doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01835-4 Pierrehumbert RT (2010a) A palette of climates for gliese 581g. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 726(1):L8 Pierrehumbert RT (2010b) Principles of Planetary Climate, 1st edn. Cambridge University Press, https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511780783 Piso AMA, Youdin AN (2014) On the Minimum Core Mass for Giant Planet Formation at Wide Separations. ApJ786(1):21. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/786/1/21 75 Podosek FA (2003) Noble Gases. Treatise on Geochemistry 1:711. https://doi.org/10. 1016/B0-08-043751-6/01066-5 Pollack JB, Yung YL (1980) Origin and evolution of planetary atmospheres. In: Annual review of earth and planetary sciences Volume 8(A80-37593 15-42) Palo Alto, Calif, Annual Reviews, Inc, 1980, p 425-487 8:425–487 Pollack JB, Hubickyj O, Bodenheimer P, et al (1996) Formation of the Giant Planets by Concurrent Accretion of Solids and Gas. Icarus124(1):62–85. https://doi.org/10. 1006/icar.1996.0190 Pont F, Knutson H, Gilliland RL, et al (2008) Detection of atmospheric haze on an extrasolar planet: the 0.55-1.05 μm transmission spectrum of HD 189733b with the HubbleSpaceTelescope. MNRAS385(1):109–118. https://doi.org/10.1111/ j.1365-2966.2008.12852.x Porcelli D, Pepin RO (2000) Rare Gas Constraints on Early Earth History. In: Canup RM, Righter K, et al. (eds) Origin of the Earth and Moon. p 435–458 Porcelli D, Woolum D, Cassen P (2001) Deep Earth rare gases: initial inventories, cap-ture from the solar nebula, and losses during Moon formation. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 193(1-2):237–251. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-821X(01)00493-9 Powell D, Feinstein AD, Lee EKH, et al (2024) Sulfur dioxide in the mid-infrared transmission spectrum of WASP-39b. Nature626(8001):979–983. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41586-024-07040-9 Quanz SP, Ottiger M, Fontanet E, et al (2022) Large interferometer for exoplanets (life)-i. improved exoplanet detection yield estimates for a large mid-infrared space-interferometer mission. Astronomy & Astrophysics 664:A21 Radoman-Shaw B, McCanta MC, Filiberto J, et al (2022) Experiments on the reac-tivity of basaltic minerals and glasses in venus surface conditions using the glenn extreme environment rig. Meteoritics & Planetary Science 57(9):1617–1633. https: //doi.org/10.1111/maps.13902 Ramirez RM, Kasting JF (2017) Could cirrus clouds have warmed early mars? Icarus 281:248–261 Ramirez RM, Levi A (2018) The ice cap zone: a unique habitable zone for ocean worlds. MNRAS477(4):4627–4640. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty761 Ramstad R, Barabash S (2021) Do intrinsic magnetic fields protect planetary atmo-spheres from stellar winds? lessons from ion measurements at mars, venus, and earth. Space Science Reviews 217(2):36 76 Ramstad R, Barabash S, Futaana Y, et al (2018) Ion escape from mars through time: an extrapolation of atmospheric loss based on 10 years of mars express measurements. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 123(11):3051–3060 Ranjan S, Schwieterman EW, Harman C, et al (2020) Photochemistry of Anoxic Abiotic Habitable Planet Atmospheres: Impact of New H2O Cross Sections. ApJ896(2):148. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab9363 Ranjan S, Schwieterman EW, Leung M, et al (2023) The Importance of the Upper Atmosphere to CO/O 2 Runaway on Habitable Planets Orbiting Low-mass Stars. ApJ958(1):L15. https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8213/ad037c Rappaport S, Levine A, Chiang E, et al (2012) Possible Disintegrating Short-period Super-Mercury Orbiting KIC 12557548. ApJ752(1):1. https://doi.org/10. 1088/0004-637X/752/1/1 Rappaport S, Barclay T, DeVore J, et al (2014) KOI-2700b—A Planet Candidate with Dusty Effluents on a 22 hr Orbit. ApJ784(1):40. https://doi.org/10.1088/ 0004-637X/784/1/40 Rauer H, Aerts C, Cabrera J, et al (2025) The PLATO mission. Experimental Astronomy 59(3):26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10686-025-09985-9 Raymond SN, Morbidelli A (2022) Planet Formation: Key Mechanisms and Global Models. In: Biazzo K, Bozza V, Mancini L, et al (eds) Demographics of Exoplanetary Systems, Lecture Notes of the 3rd Advanced School on Exoplanetary Science, pp 3–82, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88124-5_1, 2002.05756 Renggli CJ, Palm AB, King PL, et al (2019) Implications of reactions between SO2 and basaltic glasses for the mineralogy of planetary crusts. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 124(11):3205–3226. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JE006045 Ribas I, Guinan EF, Güdel M, et al (2005) Evolution of the Solar Activity over Time and Effects on Planetary Atmospheres. I. High-Energy Irradiances (1-1700 Å). ApJ622(1):680–694. https://doi.org/10.1086/427977 Righter K, Herd CDK, Boujibar A (2020) Redox Processes in Early Earth Accre-tion and in Terrestrial Bodies. Elements 16(3):161–166. https://doi.org/10.2138/ gselements.16.3.161 Rimmer P, Shorttle O, Rugheimer S (2019) Oxidised micrometeorites as evidence for low atmospheric pressure on the early earth. Geochemical Perspectives Letters 9:38–42. https://doi.org/10.7185/geochemlet.1903 Rimmer PB, Matthews JJK, Jordan S, et al (2023) The nature and implications of sulfur chemistry in venus’ cloud droplets. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120(28):e2220726120. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2220726120 77 Rogers JG, Gupta A, Owen JE, et al (2021) Photoevaporation versus core-powered mass-loss: model comparison with the 3D radius gap. MNRAS508(4):5886–5902. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stab2897 Rogers JG, Owen JE, Schlichting HE (2024a) Under the light of a new star: evolu-tion of planetary atmospheres through protoplanetary disc dispersal and boil-off. MNRAS529(3):2716–2733. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stae563 Rogers JG, Schlichting HE, Young ED (2024b) Fleeting but Not Forgotten: The Imprint of Escaping Hydrogen Atmospheres on Super-Earth Interiors. ApJ970(1):47. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad5287 Rogers LA (2015) Most 1.6 Earth-radius Planets are Not Rocky. ApJ801(1):41. https: //doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/801/1/41 Rondanelli R, Lindzen RS (2010) Can thin cirrus clouds in the tropics provide a solu-tion to the faint young sun paradox? Journal of Geophysical Research: Atmospheres 115(D2) Sakai S, Seki K, Terada N, et al (2018) Effects of a Weak Intrinsic Magnetic Field on Atmospheric Escape From Mars. Geophys. Res. Lett.45(18):9336–9343. https: //doi.org/10.1029/2018GL079972 Sakakura K, Seki K, Sakai S, et al (2022) Formation Mechanisms of the Molecular Ion Polar Plume and Its Contribution to Ion Escape From Mars. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 127(6):e29750. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021JA029750 Sakuraba H, Kurokawa H, Genda H (2019) Impact degassing and atmospheric erosion on Venus, Earth, and Mars during the late accretion. Icarus317:48–58. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.icarus.2018.05.035, arXiv:1805.07094 [astro-ph.EP] Salvador A, Samuel H (2023) Convective outgassing efficiency in planetary magma oceans: Insights from computational fluid dynamics. Icarus390:115265. https://doi. org/10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115265, arXiv:2209.06199 [astro-ph.EP] Salvador A, Avice G, Breuer D, et al (2023) Magma Ocean, Water, and the Early Atmosphere of Venus. Space Sci. Rev.219(7):51. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-023-00995-7 Salz M, Schneider PC, Czesla S, et al (2016) Energy-limited escape revised. The tran-sition from strong planetary winds to stable thermospheres. A&A585:L2. https: //doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201527042 Sanchis-Ojeda R, Rappaport S, Pallè E, et al (2015) The K2-ESPRINT Project I: Discovery of the Disintegrating Rocky Planet K2-22b with a Cometary Head and Leading Tail. ApJ812(2):112. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/812/2/112 78 Schaefer L, Fegley B (2007) Outgassing of ordinary chondritic material and some of its implications for the chemistry of asteroids, planets, and satellites. Icarus186(2):462– 483. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2006.09.002 Schaefer L, Fegley B (2010) Chemistry of atmospheres formed during accretion of the Earth and other terrestrial planets. Icarus208(1):438–448. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.icarus.2010.01.026 Scherf M, Lammer H (2021) Did Mars Possess a Dense Atmosphere During the First ∼400 Million Years? Space Sci. Rev.217(1):2. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-020-00779-3, arXiv:2102.05976 [astro-ph.EP] Scherf M, Lammer H, Erkaev NV, et al (2020) Nitrogen Atmospheres of the Icy Bodies in the Solar System. Space Sci. Rev.216(8):123. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-020-00752-0, arXiv:2011.00973 [astro-ph.EP] Scherf M, Lammer H, Spross L (2024) Eta-Earth Revisited II: Deriving a Maximum Number of Earth-Like Habitats in the Galactic Disk. Astrobiology 24(10):e916– e1061. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2023.0076 Scherf M, Vorburger A, Wurz P, et al (2025) Future Measurement Needs for the Atmospheres of Pluto and Triton. In: Luspay-Kuti A, Mandt K (eds) Triton and Pluto; The long lost twins of active worlds. IOP Publishing, p 10–1, https://doi. org/10.1088/2514-3433/ad5278ch10 Schillings A, Slapak R, Nilsson H, et al (2019) Earth atmospheric loss through the plasma mantle and its dependence on solar wind parameters. Earth, Planets and Space 71(1):70. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40623-019-1048-0 Schirrmeister BE, Gugger M, Donoghue PC (2015) Cyanobacteria and the great oxidation event: evidence from genes and fossils. Palaeontology 58(5):769–785 Schlawin E, Agol E, Walkowicz LM, et al (2010) Exoplanetary Transits of Limb-brightened Lines: Tentative Si IV Absorption by HD 209458b. ApJ722(1):L75–L79. https://doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/722/1/L75 Schlecker M, Apai D, Lichtenberg T, et al (2024) Bioverse: The Habitable Zone Inner Edge Discontinuity as an Imprint of Runaway Greenhouse Climates on Exoplanet Demographics. The Planetary Science Journal 5(1):3. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ acf57f Schlichting HE, Young ED (2022) Chemical Equilibrium between Cores, Mantles, and Atmospheres of Super-Earths and Sub-Neptunes and Implications for Their Compositions, Interiors, and Evolution. The Planetary Science Journal3(5):127. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ac68e6 79 Schlichting HE, Sari R, Yalinewich A (2015) Atmospheric mass loss during planet formation: the importance of planetesimal impacts. Icarus 247:81–94 Schmidt F, Way MJ, Costard F, et al (2022) Circumpolar ocean stability on mars 3 gy ago. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119(4):e2112930118 Schmidt F, Way MJ, Quiquet A, et al (2025) Ancient mars climate with a polar ocean and ice sheet dynamics. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets in pres(1):1 Schoonen MA (2016) Sulfur cycle. In: Encyclopedia of Geochemistry. Springer, p 1–4 Schwieterman EW, Leung M (2024) An Overview of Exoplanet Biosignatures. Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry 90(1):465–514. https://doi.org/10.2138/rmg.2024. 90.13 Schwieterman EW, Kiang NY, Parenteau MN, et al (2018) Exoplanet biosignatures: a review of remotely detectable signs of life. Astrobiology 18(6):663–708 Schwieterman EW, Reinhard CT, Olson SL, et al (2019) A Limited Habitable Zone for Complex Life. ApJ878(1):19. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab1d52 Seki K, Elphic RC, Hirahara M, et al (2001) On Atmospheric Loss of Oxygen Ions from Earth Through Magnetospheric Processes. Science 291(5510):1939–1941. https: //doi.org/10.1126/science.1058913 Seki K, Nagy A, Jackman CM, et al (2015) A Review of General Physical and Chemical Processes Related to Plasma Sources and Losses for Solar System Magnetospheres. Space Sci. Rev.192(1-4):27–89. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-015-0170-y Sembay S, Cheney A, Hampson R, et al (2025) The Soft X-ray Imager (SXI) on the SMILE Mission. Space Sci. Rev.221(8):113. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-025-01241-y Semenov D, Henning T, Helling C, et al (2003) Rosseland and Planck mean opaci-ties for protoplanetary discs. A&A410:611–621. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361: 20031279 Sharp RD, Johnson RG, Shelley EG (1977) Observation of an ionospheric acceleration mechanism producing energetic (keV) ions primarily normal to the geomagnetic field direction. J. Geophys. Res.82(22):3324. https://doi.org/10.1029/JA082i022p03324 Sharp ZD, McCubbin FM, Shearer CK (2013) A hydrogen-based oxidation mechanism relevant to planetary formation. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 380:88–97 Shelley EG, Johnson RG, Sharp RD (1972) Satellite observations of energetic heavy ions during a geomagnetic storm. J. Geophys. Res.77(31):6104. https://doi.org/10. 1029/JA077i031p06104 80 Shematovich VI, Ionov DE, Lammer H (2014) Heating efficiency in hydrogen-dominated upper atmospheres. A&A571:A94. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/ 201423573 Shkolnik EL, Barman TS (2014) HAZMAT. I. The Evolution of Far-UV and Near-UV Emission from Early M Stars. AJ148(4):64. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-6256/ 148/4/64 Showman AP, Guillot T (2002) Atmospheric circulation and tides of “51 Pegasus b-like” planets. A&A385:166–180. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361:20020101 Sing DK, Fortney JJ, Nikolov N, et al (2016) A continuum from clear to cloudy hot-Jupiter exoplanets without primordial water depletion. Nature529(7584):59–62. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature16068 Slapak R, Schillings A, Nilsson H, et al (2017) Atmospheric loss from the dayside open polar region and its dependence on geomagnetic activity: implications for atmospheric escape on evolutionary timescales. Annales Geophysicae 35(3):721–731. https://doi.org/10.5194/angeo-35-721-2017 Solomatov VS (2000) Fluid Dynamics of a Terrestrial Magma Ocean. In: Canup RM, Righter K, et al. (eds) Origin of the Earth and Moon. p 323–338 Som SM, Catling DC, Harnmeijer JP, et al (2012) Air density 2.7 billion years ago limited to less than twice modern levels by fossil raindrop imprints. Nature 484(7394):359–362 Som SM, Buick R, Hagadorn JW, et al (2016) Earth’s air pressure 2.7 billion years ago constrained to less than half of modern levels. Nature Geoscience 9(6):448–451. https://doi.org/10.1038/ngeo2713 Sossi PA, Tollan PM, Badro J, et al (2023) Solubility of water in peridotite liquids and the prevalence of steam atmospheres on rocky planets. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 601:117894 Sparrman V, Bladh S, Way MJ (2024) Multiple habitable phases on outer exosolar worlds. The Astrophysical Journal 962(1):83 Spencer JR, Rathbun JA, Travis LD, et al (2000) Io’s thermal emission from the galileo photopolarimeter-radiometer. Science 288(5469):1198–1201 Sproß L, Scherf M, Shematovich VI, et al (2021) Life as the Only Reason for the Existence of N 2-O 2-Dominated Atmospheres. Astronomy Reports 65(4):275–296. https://doi.org/10.1134/S1063772921040077 Steinmeyer ML, Woitke P, Johansen A (2023) Sublimation of refractory minerals in the gas envelopes of accreting rocky planets. A&A677:A181. https://doi.org/10.1051/ 81 0004-6361/202245636 Stökl A, Erkaev N, Dorfi E, et al (2014) Origin and loss of nebula-captured hydro-gen envelopes from ‘sub’-to ‘super-earths’ in the habitable zone of sun-like stars. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 439(4):3225–3238 Stökl A, Dorfi E, Lammer H (2015) Hydrodynamic simulations of captured pro-toatmospheres around Earth-like planets. A&A576:A87. https://doi.org/10.1051/ 0004-6361/201423638, arXiv:1505.06859 [astro-ph.EP] Stüeken EE, Buick R, Guy BM, et al (2015) Isotopic evidence for biological nitrogen fixation by molybdenum-nitrogenase from 3.2 Gyr. Nature520(7549):666–669. https: //doi.org/10.1038/nature14180 Stüeken EE, Kipp MA, Koehler MC, et al (2016) Modeling pN 2 through Geolog-ical Time: Implications for Planetary Climates and Atmospheric Biosignatures. Astrobiology 16(12):949–963. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2016.1537 Stüeken EE, Som SM, Claire M, et al (2020) Mission to Planet Earth: The First Two Billion Years. Space Sci. Rev.216(2):31. https://doi.org/10.1007/ s11214-020-00652-3 Tabataba-Vakili F, Grenfell JL, Grießmeier JM, et al (2016) Atmospheric effects of stellar cosmic rays on Earth-like exoplanets orbiting M-dwarfs. A&A585:A96. https: //doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201425602 Tang Y, Fortney JJ, Murray-Clay R (2024) Assessing Core-powered Mass Loss in the Context of Early Boil-off: Minimal Long-lived Mass Loss for the Sub-Neptune Population. ApJ976(2):221. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad8567 Taylor F, Grinspoon D (2009) Climate evolution of Venus. Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets) 114(E11):E00B40. https://doi.org/10.1029/2008JE003316 The LUVOIR Team (2019) The LUVOIR Mission Concept Study Final Report. arXiv e-prints arXiv:1912.06219. https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.1912.06219 Thomas N, Bagenal F, Hill T, et al (2004) The io neutral clouds and plasma torus. Jupiter The planet, satellites and magnetosphere 1:561–591 Thomas TB, Hu R, Lo DY (2023) Constraints on the size and composition of the ancient martian atmosphere from coupled co2–n2–ar isotopic evolution models. The Planetary Science Journal 4(3):41 Thompson MA, Krissansen-Totton J, Wogan N, et al (2022) The case and con-text for atmospheric methane as an exoplanet biosignature. Proceedings of the National Academy of Science 119(14):e2117933119. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas. 2117933119 82 Tian F, Kasting JF, Solomon SC (2009) Thermal escape of carbon from the early Martian atmosphere. Geophysical Research Letters 36(2):L02205. https://doi.org/ 10.1029/2008GL036513 Tian F, France K, Linsky JL, et al (2014) High stellar fuv/nuv ratio and oxygen contents in the atmospheres of potentially habitable planets. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 385:22–27 Tian F, France K, Linsky JL, et al (2014) High stellar FUV/NUV ratio and oxygen contents in the atmospheres of potentially habitable planets. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 385:22–27. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2013.10.024 Tian M, Heng K (2024) Atmospheric Chemistry of Secondary and Hybrid Atmospheres of Super Earths and Sub-Neptunes. ApJ 963(2):157. https://doi. org/10.3847/1538-4357/ad217c, URL https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.3847/ 1538-4357/ad217c Trainer MG, Pavlov AA, Curtis DB, et al (2004) Haze Aerosols in the Atmosphere of Early Earth: Manna from Heaven. Astrobiology 4(4):409–419. https://doi.org/10. 1089/ast.2004.4.409 Trainer MG, Jimenez JL, Yung YL, et al (2012) Nitrogen Incorporation in CH4-N2Photochemical Aerosol Produced by Far Ultraviolet Irradiation. Astrobiology 12(4):315–326. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2011.0754 Turbet M, Boulet C, Karman T (2020) Measurements and semi-empirical calcula-tions of co2+ ch4 and co2+ h2 collision-induced absorption across a wide range of wavelengths and temperatures. application for the prediction of early mars surface temperature. Icarus 346:113762 Turbet M, Bolmont E, Chaverot G, et al (2021) Day–night cloud asymmetry prevents early oceans on Venus but not on Earth. Nature598:276–280. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41586-021-03873-w Tyburczy JA, Frisch B, Ahrens TJ (1986) Shock-induced volatile loss from a carbona-ceous chondrite: implications for planetary accretion. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 80(3-4):201–207. https://doi.org/10.1016/0012-821X(86)90104-4 Tyburczy JA, Xu X, Ahrens TJ, et al (2001) Shock-induced devolatilization and isotopic fractionation of h and c from murchison meteorite: some implications for planetary accretion. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 192(1):23–30. https: //doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/S0012-821X(01)00429-0 Urata RA, Toon OB (2013) Simulations of the martian hydrologic cycle with a general circulation model: Implications for the ancient martian climate. Icarus 226(1):229– 250 83 Valley JW, Peck WH, King EM, et al (2002) A cool early earth. Geology 30(4):351–354 Van Eylen V, Agentoft C, Lundkvist MS, et al (2018) An asteroseismic view of the radius valley: stripped cores, not born rocky. MNRAS479(4):4786–4795. https:// doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty1783 Van Looveren G, Güdel M, Boro Saikia S, et al (2024) Airy worlds or barren rocks? On the survivability of secondary atmospheres around the TRAPPIST-1 planets. A&A683:A153. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202348079, arXiv:2401.16490 [astro-ph.EP] Van Looveren G, Boro Saikia S, Herbort O, et al (2025) Habitable Zone and Atmosphere Retention Distance (HaZARD): Stellar-evolution-dependent loss mod-els of secondary atmospheres. A&A694:A310. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/ 202452998, arXiv:2502.09702 [astro-ph.EP] Vazan A, Ormel CW, Brouwers MG (2024) How planets grow by pebble accretion. V. Silicate rainout delays the contraction of sub-Neptunes. A&A687:A262. https: //doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202349137 Venturini J, Alibert Y, Benz W, et al (2015) Critical core mass for enriched envelopes: the role of H 2O condensation. A&A576:A114. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/ 201424008 Venturini J, Alibert Y, Benz W (2016) Planet formation with envelope enrich-ment: new insights on planetary diversity. A&A596:A90. https://doi.org/10.1051/ 0004-6361/201628828 Venturini J, Guilera OM, Haldemann J, et al (2020) The nature of the radius valley. Hints from formation and evolution models. A&A643:L1. https://doi.org/10.1051/ 0004-6361/202039141 Venturini J, Ronco MP, Guilera OM, et al (2024) A fading radius valley towards M dwarfs, a persistent density valley across stellar types. A&A686:L9. https://doi.org/ 10.1051/0004-6361/202349088, arXiv:2404.01967 [astro-ph.EP] Vidal-Madjar A, Lecavelier des Etangs A, Désert JM, et al (2003) An extended upper atmosphere around the extrasolar planet HD209458b. Nature422(6928):143–146. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature01448 Vilović I, Schulze-Makuch D, Heller R (2023) Variations in climate habitability param-eters and their effect on earth’s biosphere during the phanerozoic eon. Scientific reports 13(1):12663 Vissapragada S, Knutson HA, Jovanovic N, et al (2020) Constraints on Metastable Helium in the Atmospheres of WASP-69b and WASP-52b with Ultranarrowband Photometry. AJ159(6):278. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ab8e34 84 Vladilo G, Murante G, Silva L, et al (2013) The habitable zone of earth-like planets with different levels of atmospheric pressure. The Astrophysical Journal 767(1):65. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-637X/767/1/65 Wakeford HR, Sing DK, Deming D, et al (2018) The Complete Transmission Spectrum of WASP-39b with a Precise Water Constraint. AJ155(1):29. https://doi.org/10. 3847/1538-3881/aa9e4e Walbecq A, Samuel H, Limare A (2025) The effect of out-of-equilibrium outgassing on the cooling of planetary magma oceans. Icarus434:116513. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.icarus.2025.116513 Walker JCG, Hays PB, Kasting JF (1981) A negative feedback mechanism for the long-term stabilization of Earth’s surface temperature. Journal of Geophysical Research: Oceans 86(C10):9776–9782. https://doi.org/10.1029/JC086iC10p09776 Wallis M (1978) Exospheric density and escape fluxes of atomic isotopes on venus and mars. Planetary and Space Science 26(10):949–953. https://doi.org/https:// doi.org/10.1016/0032-0633(78)90077-6 Watson AJ, Donahue TM, Walker JCG (1981) The dynamics of a rapidly escaping atmosphere: Applications to the evolution of Earth and Venus. Icarus48(2):150–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(81)90101-9 Way MJ, Del Genio AD (2020) Venusian habitable climate scenarios: Modeling venus through time and applications to slowly rotating venus-like exoplanets. Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets 125(5):e2019JE006276 Way MJ, Del Genio AD, Kiang NY, et al (2016) Was Venus the first habitable world of our solar system? Geophysical Research Letters 43:8376–8383. https://doi.org/ 10.1002/2016GL069790 [astro-ph.EP] Way MJ, Del Genio AD, Aleinov I, et al (2018) Climates of warm earth-like planets. i. 3d model simulations. The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 239(2):24 Way MJ, Ostberg C, Foley BJ, et al (2023) Synergies between venus & exoplanetary observations: Venus and its extrasolar siblings. Space Science Reviews 219(1):13 Wei Y, Fraenz M, Dubinin E, et al (2012) Enhanced atmospheric oxygen outflow on Earth and Mars driven by a corotating interaction region. Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics) 117(A3):A03208. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JA017340 Weichbold F, Lammer H, Scherf M, et al (2025) First detection of deuterium in venus’s extended exosphere. Preprint https://doi.org/10.21203/rs.3.rs-7720153/v1 Westall F, Höning D, Avice G, et al (2023) The habitability of venus. Space Science Reviews 219(2):17 85 Wignall PB (2011) Lethal volcanism. Nature 477(7364):285–286 Wilde SA, Valley JW, Peck WH, et al (2001) Evidence from detrital zircons for the existence of continental crust and oceans on the earth 4.4 gyr ago. Nature 409(6817):175–178 Williams CD, Mukhopadhyay S (2019) Capture of nebular gases during Earth’s accre-tion is preserved in deep-mantle neon. Nature565(7737):78–81. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41586-018-0771-1 Woitke P, Herbort O, Helling C, et al (2021) Coexistence of ch4, co2, and h2o in exoplanet atmospheres. Astronomy & Astrophysics 646:A43 Wolff SG, Wang J, Stapelfeldt K, et al (2024) The Roman coronagraph community participation program: observation planning. In: Coyle LE, Matsuura S, Perrin MD (eds) Space Telescopes and Instrumentation 2024: Optical, Infrared, and Millimeter Wave, p 1309255, https://doi.org/10.1117/12.3020205, 2411.17868 Wong I (2021) Exoplanet phase curves from TESS: Results from the Primary Mission and future prospects. In: American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #237, p 302.02 Wood BJ, Walter MJ, Wade J (2006) Accretion of the earth and segregation of its core. Nature 441(7095):825–833 Woods T, Rottman G, Harder J, et al (2000) title>overview of the eos sorce mission</title. Proc SPIE 4135:192–. https://doi.org/10.1117/12.494229 Wordsworth R, Pierrehumbert R (2014) Abiotic oxygen-dominated atmospheres on terrestrial habitable zone planets. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 785(2):L20 Wordsworth R, Kalugina Y, Lokshtanov S, et al (2017) Transient reducing greenhouse warming on early mars. Geophysical Research Letters 44(2):665–671. https://doi. org/https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL071766 Wordsworth RD (2016) The climate of early mars. Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences 44(1):381–408 Wordsworth RD, Schaefer LK, Fischer RA (2018) Redox Evolution via Gravitational Differentiation on Low-mass Planets: Implications for Abiotic Oxygen, Water Loss, and Habitability. AJ155(5):195. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/aab608 Yang J, Boué G, Fabrycky DC, et al (2014) Strong Dependence of the Inner Edge of the Habitable Zone on Planetary Rotation Rate. Astrophysical Journal 787:L2. https://doi.org/10.1088/2041-8205/787/1/L2 Yang J, Liu Y, Hu Y, et al (2014) Water trapping on tidally locked terrestrial planets requires special conditions. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 796(2):L22 86 Yau AW, Abe T, Peterson WK (2007) The polar wind: Recent observations. Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics 69(16):1936–1983. https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.jastp.2007.08.010 Yokochi R, Marty B (2004) A determination of the neon isotopic composition of the deep mantle. Earth and Planetary Science Letters 225(1-2):77–88. https://doi.org/ 10.1016/j.epsl.2004.06.010 Yoshida T, Terada N, Ikoma M, et al (2022) Less Effective Hydrodynamic Escape of H2-H 2O Atmospheres on Terrestrial Planets Orbiting Pre-main-sequence M Dwarfs. ApJ934(2):137. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-4357/ac7be7 Young ED, Shahar A, Schlichting HE (2023) Earth shaped by primordial H 2 atmo-spheres. Nature616(7956):306–311. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-023-05823-0 Yung YL, Demore WB (eds) (1999) Photochemistry of planetary atmospheres Zahnle KJ, Kasting JF (1986) Mass fractionation during transonic escape and impli-cations for loss of water from Mars and Venus. Icarus68(3):462–480. https://doi. org/10.1016/0019-1035(86)90051-5 Zahnle KJ, Gacesa M, Catling DC (2019) Strange messenger: A new history of hydrogen on earth, as told by xenon. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 244:56–85 Zahnle KJ, Lupu R, Catling DC, et al (2020) Creation and Evolution of Impact-generated Reduced Atmospheres of Early Earth. The Planetary Science Jour-nal1(1):11. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ab7e2c Zerkle AL, Poulton SW, Newton RJ, et al (2017) Onset of the aerobic nitrogen cycle during the Great Oxidation Event. Nature542(7642):465–467. https://doi.org/10. 1038/nature20826 Zhang HL, Hirschmann MM, Lord OT, et al (2024) Ferric iron stabilization at deep magma ocean conditions. Science Advances 10(42):eadp1752. https://doi.org/10. 1126/sciadv.adp1752 Zhang M, Knutson HA, Wang L, et al (2022) Detection of Ongoing Mass Loss from HD 63433c, a Young Mini-Neptune. AJ163(2):68. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/ ac3f3b Zhang Z, Morley CV, Gully-Santiago M, et al (2023) Giant tidal tails of helium escaping the hot Jupiter HAT-P-32 b. Science Advances 9(23):eadf8736. https: //doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.adf8736 Zieba S, Kreidberg L, Ducrot E, et al (2023) No thick carbon dioxide atmosphere on the rocky exoplanet TRAPPIST-1 c. Nature620(7975):746–749. https://doi.org/10. 1038/s41586-023-06232-z 87 Zilinskas M, van Buchem CPA, Miguel Y, et al (2022) Observability of evaporating lava worlds. A&A661:A126. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/202142984 88