Title: Ice Deposition Fronts In Porous Bodies From Transient Heating Events In a Protoplanetary Disk

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11841v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Jul 2026 03:01:27 GMT

Number of Pages: 31

Markdown Content:
# Ice Deposition Fronts In Porous Bodies From Transient Heating Events In a Protoplanetary Disk 

Stephen Li a, ∗, Alice C. Quillen a, Adam E. Rubinstein a, Dominique Segura-Cox a, Kevin Righter b

> aDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA
> bDepartment of Earth and Environmental Science, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14627, USA

Abstract 

Using a 1D mass and heat transport model, we numerically integrate heat flow and gas transport in a porous body exposed to a transient heating event while embedded in a protoplanetary disk. When small icy grains are heated, volatiles sublimate, enriching the disk with volatile gases. When a porous body enters this heated, volatile-rich environment, volatile gases di ff use throughout the cool, porous body and deposit ice where the partial pressure of a volatile exceeds its vapor pressure. We simulate sublimation and deposition fronts of water, carbon dioxide, and carbon monoxide. Our simulations show that an ice deposition front forms and moves deeper into the porous body as the body warms. The amount of nebular gas deposited in an initially dry body is usually extremely low; however, in an initially icy body, an ice deposition front contains locally sublimated volatiles. In this case, the front can increase the ice volume fraction (by a factor of 2) in a thin layer below the surface. We find that the propagation speed, propagation strength, and final depth of an ice deposition front primarily depend on pore size. We propose that nebular heating events can alter the subsurface morphology and physical properties of porous icy objects embedded in a protoplanetary disk. 

1. Introduction 

Chondrules are small (diameter 0.1 to 1 mm) ig-neous spheres that are commonly found within mete-orites. The properties of chondrules imply that small rocky particles in the protoplanetary disk experienced transient heating events (Brearley and Jones, 1998). In this study, we explore how transient heating could have aff ected large porous bodies that could also have been present in the protoplanetary disk. Models for chondrule formation include nebular shocks (Ciesla and Hood, 2002; Desch and Connolly, 2002), planetary bow shocks (Tanaka et al., 2013; Mann et al., 2016), impact jetting (Sanders and Scott, 2012; Cashion et al., 2025) or vapor plumes caused by catas-trophic impacts (Stewart and Ahrens, 2000). Forma-tion of chondrules is expected to occur in the disk midplane (Morris and Boley, 2018) and require cool-ing times ranging from tens of minutes to a few hours (Fujii and Miyamoto, 1983; Stammler and Dullemond, 2014). The heat required for melting rocky material   

> ∗Corresponding author
> Email address: sluniews@ur.rochester.edu (Stephen Li)

and forming chondrules needs to be quite high (temper-ature T ≳ 1500K; Costa et al. 2017). However, lower-temperature heating events that are capable of sublimat-ing volatile compounds, but not high enough to melt rocky material, could also occur in protoplanetary disks (Podolak et al., 2011) and may be more frequent or nu-merous than high temperature heating events (Ormel et al., 2008; Matsumoto and Arakawa, 2023). While chondrule formation likely took place within 2-3 AU of the Sun (Iida et al., 2001; Boss and Durisen, 2005), shock heating caused by spiral density waves could have occurred throughout the protoplanetary disk. Models that are locally isothermal may poorly approx-imate the locations of ice lines (Podolak et al., 2011; Ziampras et al., 2020). Transient heating events can fa-cilitate chemical reactions that would not have other-wise occurred; as inferred from fine grained phyllosili-cate rims on chondrules (Cyr et al., 1998; Ciesla et al., 2003). Heating events in the disk could vary the thick-ness of the water ice layer on a small aggregate after cooling (Sirono and Furuta, 2024). Both asteroidal materials (Britt et al., 2002; Garvie et al., 2024) and icy pebbles that are formed in a pro-toplanetary nebula are likely to be flu ff y or porous arXiv:2607.11841v1 [astro-ph.EP] 13 Jul 2026 (Kataoka et al., 2013; Lorek et al., 2018; Zivithal et al., 2025). Comets too are porous (Prialnik and Podolak, 1995; Thomas et al., 2013; Fulle et al., 2016; Kossacki and Czechowski, 2018; Pätzold et al., 2019; O’Rourke et al., 2020). Sublimated comet material escapes into the interplanetary medium (Whipple, 1950; Gombosi et al., 1986; Bouziani and Jewitt, 2022). However, some models predict that sublimated gas permeate the comet body and be deposited below the comet’s surface where the temperature remains low (Kossacki et al., 2015; Spohn et al., 2015; Gundlach et al., 2018; Fellows et al., 2020; Zivithal et al., 2025). A transient heating event that can melt a mm diameter grain may not last long enough to sublimate all the ice from the center of 10 cm diameter or larger porous body. In this study, we investigate the e ff ects of transient heating events on the internal ice fraction of porous bod-ies that could be present in a protoplanetary disk. Lo-cal heating in a disk can cause small (mm-sized) icy grains to rapidly sublimate, enriching the disk’s volatile gas content. Consequently, we consider the possibility that the nebular gas is rich in warm volatiles while it is hot. Volatile gases present in the protoplanetary nebula could penetrate the porous body, and be deposited in the form of ices below the surface, as illustrated in Figure 1. As an icy body’s surface is heated, its sublimating volatiles would both out-gas into the disk environment and penetrate deeper within the porous body where they can be deposited as ice, as illustrated in Figure 2. When heated, a porous medium can experience an advancing internal sublimation front where ice is sublimated (e.g. Kulikovskii 2002; Scarpa and Milano 2002; Warning et al. 2015; Bouziani and Jewitt 2022). If the interior of a porous body is cold, it could act like a cold trap causing an advancing internal condensation or deposi-tion front (e.g., Kulikovskii 2002; Scarpa and Milano 2002; Lei et al. 2024). In the context of comets, ice is deposited below the sublimation front in a layer called a ‘sinter layer’ (Kossacki et al., 2015; Spohn et al., 2015; Zivithal et al., 2025). 

2. Transport Equations for the Numerical Model 

The gas pressure in the midplane of a circumstellar disk is lower than that typical of a planetary atmosphere (see Figure 1 by Quillen et al. 2024). Multiphase trans-port models that are developed for applications on Earth (e.g., Warning et al. 2015) must be adapted to apply at the low pressures of a circumstellar disk. Inside a porous body that is embedded in the disk (and exclud-ing extreme events such as a high-velocity impacts), the vapor pressure of most volatiles would be below the   

> Figure 1: A dry, porous and rocky body is heated at the surface by a hot nebula that contains volatile gases. Volatiles (represented as green dots) can penetrate the porous body and can be deposited as ices below the surface where it is cooler. The colors of the porous bodies illustrate a temperature gradient. The interior of the body acts like a cold trap.

volatile’s triple point (see Fellows et al. 2020). For ex-ample, water’s triple point is at a temperature of 273 K and at a pressure of 611 Pa, but the disk midplane pressure at 1 AU from the Sun is only a few Pa in a pro-tosolar disk model similar to the minimum mass solar nebula (Quillen et al., 2024). When the gas partial pres-sure of a molecule exceeds its vapor pressure, the gas phase is deposited on a surface as solid ice. We use the word ‘deposited’ instead of ‘condensed’ to make it clear that ice is deposited and that a liquid phase is unlikely to be present. The physical model we use for an icy porous body heated by hot ambient nebular gas is a modification of the icy conglomerate model for comets by Whipple (1950) (also see Gombosi et al. 1986; Bouziani and Je-witt 2022). This model resembles the multiphase porous medium transport model by Warning et al. (2015) for sublimation fronts that occur during vacuum freeze dry-ing of beef. However, following Schweighart et al. (2021) and as we describe below, because the protoplan-etary disk gas has a low pressure, the mean free path is large compared to the pore size. This limit, known as the the Knudsen limit, lets us simplify the transport model. The surface boundary condition for the icy porous body di ff ers from that of a comet as heating of the body is 2Figure 2: An initially icy and porous body is heated at its surface due to a short duration heating event in the protoplanetary disk. Subli-mating volatiles below the surface out-gas and also penetrate into the interior where they can be deposited as ices. Dark blue represents ice and aquamarine represents volatile rich gas. Both sublimating and ice deposition layers can advance into the body as the body is heated. Af-ter the nebula’s temperature drops back to an equilibrium value, ice remains concentrated in a thin layer below the surface. 

primarily due to a temperature increase in the gas phase of the circumstellar disk, rather than solar illumination. Within an icy conglomerate, gas molecules within pores can move quickly in comparison to the time it takes for heat to be conductively transported through the solid. Mass and energy each can be described with advective and di ff usive transport equations, but the dif-fusion coe ffi cients and Peclet numbers (describing the ratio of advection to di ff usion rates) di ff er. The di ff er-ent timescales present in a multi-phase transport model present a challenge for numerical integration but can also help us simplify the transport equations of the model. We use a 1-dimensional model to describe a porous body as a function of depth, x, and time, t. The surface is at x = 0, and depth corresponds with increasingly pos-itive values of x. Bulk quantities that are a function of depth and time ( x, t) are temperature T , bulk mass den-sity ρeff , bulk specific heat capacity cp,eff , bulk thermal conductivity, kT,e ff and porosity ϕ. Here, ρeff is the mass per unit volume including all solids and gases. Simi-larly cp,eff and kT,e ff are e ff ective specific heat capacity and thermal conductivity per unit volume including all constituents. The solid material consists of a rocky substrate and one or more ices. An integer index ‘ i’ is used to label solid and gas constituents. Each volatile is associated with an ice. The pores contain molecular gas species, each of which is described with a number density and a partial pressure Pi. To calculate parameters that rely on the volume physically occupied in each pore, we scale bulk values by the local porosity ϕ, which is the ratio of pore volume to total volume. Quantities that rely on the volume physically occupied by solid material are scaled by (1 − ϕ). We denote the bulk number density of a gas species ‘ i’ per unit volume as ng,i. The number density of that gas species within a pore is then ng,i/ϕ giving a relation between partial pressure, temperature and bulk number density that is based on the ideal gas law 

Pi = ng,i

ϕ kBT. (1) Additional details of the numerical method are de-scribed in Appendix A. 

2.1. Gas transport in the Knudsen Regime 

In a porous medium described by a mean pore diam-eter, dp, the Knudsen number is the dimensionless ratio of the mean free path λ in the gas to the pore diameter Kn ≡ λ

dp

. (2) We estimate the mean free path in the gas 

λ ∼ 1

√2ngσ = kBTP √2σ , (3) where ng is the number density of molecules in the gas, and on the right, we have used the ideal gas law. Here, 

kB is Boltzmann’s constant. The factor of √2 comes from kinetic theory (Chapman and Cowling, 1990). Us-ing a collisional cross section typical of collisions be-tween two CO 2 molecules with σCO 2 ∼ 2 × 10 −19 m2

(Song et al., 2024), similar to that of molecular hydro-gen, we estimate a mean free path of 

λ ∼ 0.15 m 

 T

300 K 

 1 Pa 

P

!

. (4) We have used a pressure similar to that estimated in the midplane at 1 AU from the Sun for a proto-solar disk (following Table 1 by Quillen et al. 2024). There are few constraints on the pore distribution of primordial porous bodies; consequently, we follow Bouziani and Jewitt (2022) who described the porous medium with a mean pore diameter dp and considered a 3large range of possible values, with dp in the range 10 −2

to 10 −8 m. As long as the pressure remains low, Equation 4 im-plies that the mean free path should exceed the pore di-ameter, λ ≫ dp, giving Knudsen number Kn ≫ 1. In this regime, called the Knudsen regime, molecule-wall collisions should be more frequent than collisions be-tween gas molecules. Consequently, the flux of each molecular species through the porous medium can be described independently of the other species and with a di ff usion coe ffi cient, known as the Knudsen di ff usion coe ffi cient, that depends upon the thermal velocity and the pore diameter (Welty et al., 2008). Knudsen di ff u-sion has also used in comet out-gassing models (Fanale and Salvail, 1984; Bouziani and Jewitt, 2022). For a molecule of type indexed ‘ i’, and with number of molecules per unit volume ng,i, the equation for gas transport in the Knudsen regime is: 

∂ng,i

∂t = ∂∂x DKn ,i

∂ng,i

∂x

!

+ ˙nsub ,i. (5) The rate ˙ nsub ,i is the rate that the number density is in-creased by local sublimation of the associated ice (the solid form of the molecule). If the species is deposited on surfaces as ice, then ˙ nsub ,i would be negative. We use a subscript ‘ g’ to make it clear that ng,i refers to the number density of a gas molecule rather than that of a solid component. The Knudsen di ff usion coe ffi cient 

DKn ,i depends on the product of the pore diameter and the thermal velocity (Welty et al., 2008); 

DKn ,i = dpVth ,i(T )3 . (6) The mean of the magnitude of the velocity (computed using the Boltzmann distribution) or thermal velocity 

Vth ,i is 

Vth ,i(T ) =

r 8kBT

πmi

, (7) where mi is the mass of a single molecule of type ‘ i’. 

2.2. Energy Transport 

To model energy transport, we adopt a multiphase multi-constituent model for transport through a porous medium similar to that by Warning et al. (2015); 

ρeff cp,eff 

∂T

∂t = ∂∂x kT,e ff 

∂T

∂x

!

−

X

> i

cp,g,i Ji

∂T

∂x

−

X

> i

Esub ,i ˙nsub ,i. (8) The term on the left is the energy required per unit vol-ume to increase the local temperature. The term propor-tional to kT,eff describes di ff usion of energy due to ther-mal conductivity. The rightmost term, Pi Esub ,i ˙nsub ,i, is the energy per unit volume per unit time from the sub-limation and deposition of volatiles. The quantity Esub ,i

is the latent heat per molecule of sublimation of the volatile species labeled by subscript i. The bulk num-ber density rate ˙ nsub ,i is the number of molecules of type ‘i’ per unit time per unit volume that are sublimating or being deposited in the porous medium. The second term from the right in Equation 8, (pro-portional to ∂T 

> ∂x

), is advective and depends on the fluxes 

Ji, of each type of molecule through the porous medium. The quantities cp,g,i are the specific heat capacity of each gaseous molecular component. We will discuss the ad-vective term further in Section 2.2.2. Neglecting the rightmost two terms, the energy transport equation of Equation 8 describes di ff usive thermal heat transport in a solid. The bulk density, bulk specific heat capacity, and bulk thermal conductivity ( ρeff , cp,eff , kT,eff ) take into account both solid and gas constituents in a small local volume. The bulk density times e ff ective specific heat capacity 

ρeff , cp,eff is related to solid and gas constituents by 

ρeff cp,eff = (1 − ϕ)

X

> i,solids

(χs,iρs,icp,s,i)

+ ϕ

X

> i,gases

(χg,iρg,icp,g,i). (9) Here χg,i denotes the gas species volume fraction in pores, where the subscript ‘ i’ indicates the species, and the subscript ‘ g’ indicates gas. The density ρg,i is the gas mass density of species i inside the pores. Similarly, 

cp,g,i is its specific heat capacity. The quantity χs,i is the volume fraction of a solid species ‘ i’ in the matrix excluding the pores. Again the subscript i labels the species and the subscript ‘ s’ indi-cates that it is a solid. The specific heat capacity cp,s,i is that of the particular solid constituent, and ρs,i is its den-sity. These quantities are computed for the matrix mate-rial that excludes the pores. For each volatile molecule we can use the same index to represent quantities for both gas and solid ice phases of the molecule. We estimate the bulk thermal conductivity as 

kT,e ff = (1 − ϕ)

X

> i,solids

(χs,ikT,i), (10) where kT,i is a solid constituent’s thermal conductivity. We neglect the contribution of radiation inside pores. Transport of energy by the gas is described by the ad-vective term in Equation 8. 42.2.1. Volumetric Heat Capacity 

In this subsection we show that Equation 9 can be simplified to only account for the solid material. We adopt the near-universal value for the volumetric heat capacity of solids (the product of a material’s density ρ

times its specific heat capacity cp), 

Cuni = ρcp ≈ 3 × 10 6 J m −3 K−1. (11) (Ashby et al., 2019). An ideal gas has heat capacity per molecule at constant pressure 

Cp = γγ − 1 kB, (12) where γ is the adiabatic index. We compare the volumetric specific heat of the gas of species i in a pore cp,g,iρg,i with the universal value Cuni 

for a the solid. With adiabatic index γi for the species, the volumetric specific heat of gas in a pore is 

ρg,icp,g,i ∼ Pi

T

γi

γi − 1

= 10 −3 J m −3 K−1 γi

(γi − 1) 

 Pi

1 Pa 



×

 T

1000 K 

−1

. (13) The gas pressure in a circumstellar disk is usually below a few Pa (e.g., see Table 1 by Quillen et al. 2024 for a protosolar disk model). Consequently, the volumetric heat capacity of the gas 

ρg,icp,g,i ≪ Cuni (14) is likely to be many orders of magnitude below the uni-versal value for a solid given in Equation 11. The energy required to heat or cool the gas in the pores is likely to be negligible when compared to that required to heat or cool the solid components. We can neglect the gas con-tribution to ρeff cp,eff . Specifically, we neglect the right-most term in Equation 9. 

2.2.2. Advective Heat Transport 

The energy transport equation of Equation 8 contains an advective heating term proportional to ∂T 

> ∂x

due to gas flowing through the porous medium. We assess the strength of the advective heating term in comparison to the di ff usive term in Equation 8 by computing the di-mensionless ratio known as the Péclet number. The Péclet number for heat transfer is the ratio of the approximate sizes of the di ff usive and advective terms in a heat equation. In the Knudsen regime, the flux of molecular constituent ‘ i’ through the porous medium is 

Ji ∼ DKn ,imi∇ng,i. (15) We approximate the gradient with a length scale L giv-ing ∇ng,i ∼ ng,i/L. The gradient in the strength of the di ff usion term in Equation 8 is also approximated by the length L. For the energy transport equation (Equa-tion 8), the Péclet number is Pe ≈ 1

kT,eff 

X

> i

cp,g,iρg,i DKn ,i. (16) To estimate the Péclet number, we use an approxi-mate value for the thermal conductivity of a rocky solid that is similar to that of glass or concrete, 

kT,typ = 1 W m −1 K−1 (17) (Bird et al., 2007). This value is about half the conduc-tivity value of water ice (Bonales et al., 2017). We use Equation 6 for the Knudsen di ff usion coe ffi cient which depends on the thermal velocity in Equation 7. To give a high estimate for the di ff usion coe ffi cient, we use the mass of molecular hydrogen and temperature exceeding the peak temperature in any of our simulations, T =

1000 K. We use Equation 13 to estimate ρg,icp,g,i for molecular hydrogen. Putting these values into Equation 16, the resulting estimate for the Péclet number is Pe ∼ 10 −6

 P

1 Pa 

  T

1000 K 

 32 dp

10 −6 m

!

×

 m

2 AMU 

− 12

. (18) Because this is based on molecular hydrogen we have dropped the i indices, pressure P represents the total gas pressure, m is the mass of molecular hydrogen, and AMU refers to an atomic mass unit. Equation 18 shows that the Péclet number is likely to be small. This implies that we can neglect the advective term (proportional to ∂T 

> ∂x

) in the energy transport equa-tion (Equation 8). 

2.2.3. Simplified Heat Equation 

In Section 2.2.1, we showed why only the heat ca-pacity of solid materials needs to be taken into account. In Section 2.2.2, we found that we can neglect the ad-vective heating term in Equation 8 because the Péclet number is small. We use the near universal value Cuni to describe the specific heats of all the solid constituents. 5With these simplifications, we reduce the energy trans-port equation (Equation 8) to (1 − ϕ)Cuni 

∂T

∂t = ∂∂x kT,e ff 

∂T

∂x

!

−

X

> i

Esub ˙nsub ,i. (19) We have scaled Cuni to take into account the fraction of volume (1 − ϕ) occupied by solid material. 

2.2.4. Sublimation, Deposition, & Vapor Pressure 

We use a non-equilibrium relation to estimate the sublimation /deposition rate of a vapor. The Hertz-Knudsen adsorption rate describes the rate of adsorption of gas molecules on a surface. For a gas with pressure P, the Hertz-Knudsen rate of adsorption per unit area is 

dN dA dt ∼ αads P

√2πmk BT , (20) where m the mean molecular mass. The dimensionless coe ffi cient αads can be used to fit experimental data or theoretical predictions and depends on properties of the molecule and (e.g., Kossacki et al. 1999). A non-equilibrium rate for sublimation or deposition on a surface per unit area can be estimated by modify-ing the Hertz-Knudsen adsorption rate so that the rate of sublimation or deposition on a surface per unit area depends on the di ff erence between the partial and vapor pressure (e.g., Scarpa and Milano 2002; Warning et al. 2015; Kossacki 2021). For a molecular species with in-dex ‘ i’, the modified adsorption rate is 

dN i

dA dt ∼ αads ,i(Pi − Pv,i)

√2πmikBT , (21) which is based on the number Ni of molecules of type ‘i’ impacting the surface per unit of time (Holyst et al., 2015). We estimate that the number of pores per unit vol-ume scales with the pore size, Np ∝ d−3 

> p

with porosity 

ϕ ≈ Npd3

> p

. Following Schweighart et al. (2021), we ap-proximate the surface area in a volume element with the product of the number of pores times their surface area 

∼ Npd2 

> p

∼ ϕ/ dp. The surface area in a volume element and Equation 21 give an adsorption or deposition rate per unit volume of ˙ndep ,i ∼ ϕ(Pi − Pv,i)

√2πAimikBT

αads ,i

dp

∼ Vth ,i(ng,i − nv,i) αads ,i

4dp

, (22) where we have used Equation 7 for the thermal velocity and defined a bulk number density associated with the vapor pressure 

nv,i ≡ ϕPv,i

kBT . (23) If the partial pressure exceeds the vapor pressure and Equation 22 gives a positive number, then we assume that ice is deposited. If Equation 22 is negative then we assume that ice is sublimated and we estimate the sublimation rate as ˙nsub ,i = −˙ndep ,i. (24) We adopt the same constant value of αads ,i for all molecular species and neglect the dependence of these coe ffi cients on temperature (Kossacki et al., 1999, 2017). For each volatile molecular species, we adopt a model for vapor pressure consistent with the Clausius-Clapeyron relation. We assume vapor pressure as a function of temperature for species with index ‘ i’ can be described by the function 

Pv,i(T ) = eAv,i−Bv,i/T . (25) Table 1 lists coe ffi cients Av,i and Bv,i for water, carbon dioxide and carbon monoxide based on fits to laboratory measurements by Fray and Schmitt (2009). 

2.3. Porosity 

Porosity is a measure of the percentage of void space within a given volume. In our simulations, because ices are sublimated or deposited, the porosity varies as a function of depth and time. We describe our methods for computing the porosity as a function of depth in Ap-pendix A.4. While we allow the porosity to vary, we hold the pore diameter constant. 

2.4. Boundary Conditions 

At the base of the array (the grid point furthest from the surface), we adopt a zero heat flux or Neumann boundary condition. Similarly, we adopt a zero di ff u-sive flux lower boundary condition for each gas species. Comet models (e.g., Gombosi et al. 1986) adjust the surface temperature so that the heat flux from absorbed solar radiation is equal to the sum of the conductive heat flux and that emitted via thermal radiation. Instead of absorbed solar radiation, the surface of our simulated porous body is heated due to thermal exchange by colli-sions with the surrounding nebular gas, which is domi-nant over heating due to gas drag (Gombosi et al., 1986; 6Table 1: Properties of Each Molecular Species 

Quantity Symbol Units H2O CO CO 2 Forsterite Mean Molecular Weight Ai atomic mass 18 28 44 140.691 Density of Associated Solid ρs,i kg m −3 10 3 870 1640 3270 Latent Heat of Sublimation Hsub ,i J kg −1 28.4 ×10 5 2.16 ×10 5 7.58 ×10 5 –Sublimation Energy Esub ,i J/particle 8.489 × 10 −20 1.004 × 10 −20 5.538 × 10 −20 –Adsorption Coe ffi cient αads – 0.1 0.1 0.1 –Solid Thermal Conductivity kT,i W m −1 K−1 2.1 0.7 0.7 5Coe ffi cient for Vapor Pressure Av,i - 25.279 21.7629 30.123 –Coe ffi cient for Vapor Pressure Bv,i K 5132.0 748.2 4154.0 –             

> The CO ice density is by González Díaz et al. (2022), CO 2ice density is by Leliwa-Kopysty´ nski et al. (2013), and Forsterite solid density is by Anthony et al. (2001). The latent heat of sublimation for water ice is consistent with the value of 2 .59 ×10 6J/kg by Leliwa-Kopysty´ nski et al. (2013) and the latent heats of sublimation for CO and CO 2are by Leliwa-Kopysty´ nski et al. (2013). Kossacki and Leliwa-Kopystynski 2014 show temperature dependence for the adsorption coe ffi cient for H 2O, finding a minimum value near αads =0.1 (in equation 20) when the temperature exceeds the sublimation temperature. We take this value for all volatiles tested when sublimation or deposition is occurring. The CO solid thermal conductivity is by Romanova et al. (2014), CO 2solid thermal conductivity is by Saiduzzaman et al. (2025), and Forsterite thermal conductivity is by Clauser and Huenges (1995). The coe ffi cients Av,iand Bv,ifor the vapor pressure curve are defined in Equation 25 and are based on fits to laboratory measurements compiled by Fray and Schmitt (2009).

Desch and Connolly, 2002). Following Desch and Con-nolly (2002); Gombosi et al. (1986), our surface bound-ary condition for a porous body exposed to the nebula is 

KT,eff 

dT dx x=0

= nneb Vth ,neb kB(Tneb − Tsurf )

+ ϵsurf σS B (T 4neb − T 4surf ) (26) where Tsurf is the surface temperature and ϵsurf is the emissivity at the surface. Quantities describing the neb-ular gas are number density of molecules ( nneb ), temper-ature ( Tneb ), and thermal velocity ( Vth ,neb ). We solved Equation 26 numerically for a nebular pressure of a few Pa, and we found that the surface temperature remains very close to that of the nebula; 

Tsurf ∼ Tneb . Consequently, we set both the surface tem-perature and gas pressure to that of the nebula giving time-dependent and Dirichlet surface boundary condi-tions in both quantities. 

2.5. Ambient Environmental Conditions in the proto-planetary Nebula 

To model a transient heating event in a protoplane-tary disk, we require an ambient or equilibrium state for the protoplanetary disk prior to the transient heating event. For the ambient gas disk, we adopt the proto-solar disk model by Quillen et al. (2024). This model is similar to the protosolar disk model by Desch (2007) that takes into account subsequent planet formation and migration, but it has power-law exponents describing its dependence on radius that are similar to the minimum mass solar nebula by Hayashi (1981). This disk model has an equilibrium midplane gas density, ρgas , gas temperature, Tgas , and gas pressure, 

Pgas :

ρgas = 1.6 × 10 −8 kg m −3

 ao

1 AU 

− 11 4

(27) 

Tgas = 150 K 

 ao

1 AU 

− 12

(28) 

Pgas = 9.92 Pa 

 ao

1 AU 

− 13 4  ¯m

2 AMU 

−1

(29) where ¯ m is the average mass of particles in the nebular gas and a0 is distance from the central star. We use these values to determine the number density of the ambient nebular gas. With Xi equal to the abun-dance of molecular species i with respect to molecular hydrogen, the ambient nebular number density of that same species is 

nneb ,i = 4.8 × 10 18 particles m −3

 ao

1 AU 

− 11 4

×

 ¯m

2 AMU 

−1

Xi. (30) 

2.5.1. Transiently Heating Nebular Gas and Decay Rate 

We model a transient heating event in the nebula us-ing an instantaneous increase in nebular temperature and density, at t = 0, followed by an exponential decay back to the initial conditions. This is an approximation 7to the conditions experienced by an object embedded in a disk undergoing a nebular shock (e.g., Ciesla and Hood 2002; Desch and Connolly 2002, also see Miura and Nakamoto 2005). We model the transient heating event with 

X(t) = Xambient + (Xmax − Xambient )e−t/τ (31) where X is a representative variable for any decaying nebular environmental quantity ( Tneb , ρneb , X volatile ) and 

τ is the decay timescale. We calculate the nebular gas pressure during this decay period using the ideal gas law. We set the ambient volatile gas fraction for the gas species being simulated to be 0, with the maximum gas fraction being listed in Table 3. We set the H2 gas frac-tion as the rest of the available gas fraction (X H2 = 1-Xvolatile ). The strength of an event is described with the ratio of the chosen maximum temperature Tneb,max to the ambi-ent temperature Tneb,ambient :

Γ ≡ Tneb,max 

Tneb,ambient 

. (32) Ambient nebular values are calculated using Equations 27, 28, and 29. Ambient nebular values at our fiducial orbital radius of 5 AU can be found in Table 2. 

3. Numerical Results 

We simulate a cool, porous body exposed to a tran-siently heated nebular environment. We increase the ambient values of gas temperature and number density by a factor of the event’s strength, Γ, and increase the pressure by Γ2. We assume a decay timescale, τ, (Seen in Equation 31) to allow the environmental values of gas temperature and number density to decay back to their ambient values, calculating pressure with the ideal gas law. For these simulations, we fix the pore diameter. As deposited ice can decrease pore diameter, this is only a good approximation if the ice fraction is initially low. The depth required for a simulation is dependent on the thermal skin depth of the body which depends on the duration theat of the heating event. To order of mag-nitude, the skin depth is 

lskin (t) ∼

r kT theat 

Cuni 

∼ 2.5 cm 

 theat 

360 sec 

 12

, (33) and we have used a heat di ff usivity Dheat = kT,eff /Cuni 

with volumetric heat capacity Cuni given in Equation 11 and the thermal conductivity kT of Forsterite, listed in Table 1. For a 6 minute heating event, the skin depth is about 2.5 cm. In this paper, we present short simula-tions (360 sec) with the goal of understanding phenom-ena associated with transient heating. After the heated medium returns to its cooler ambient level, the deposi-tion front can continue to advance, eventually reaching a final position that is deeper than the skin depth. To see the final resting place of the deposition front, we choose a grid length that is a few times larger than the skin depth. The integration duration is chosen so that in most cases, the simulation is integrated long enough that simulated deposition fronts reach their final posi-tion, with exceptions for the largest tested Γ and the longest duration τ, for which the movement of the ice deposition front has decreased but not ceased. Fiducial parameters for our simulations are listed in Table 2 and parameters specific to individual simula-tions are in listed in Table 3. Each simulation tracks a single volatile molecular species in both solid and gas forms, molecular hydrogen, and a rocky substrate. The properties of the volatiles are listed in Table 1, and those of the rocky substrate are in the forsterite column in Ta-ble 1. We plot snapshots of the deposition front for individ-ual runs. We also run a suite of simulations varying in-dividual parameters, where we plot the depth of the ice front and the mass of ice deposited per square meter of surface area. We explore how the deposition front is sensitive to the transient heating event’s strength ( Γ), pore diame-ter ( dp), ice volume fraction ( fice ), decay timescale ( τ), porosity ( ϕ), and the particular volatile species that is included in the simulation. 

3.1. An Initially Dry Body 

We discuss our numerical simulations of a cool, porous, initially dry body exposed to a suddenly hot protoplanetary nebula that contains molecular hydrogen and warm H 2O vapor. Parameters for this simulation, denoted Run 1, are listed in Tables 2 and 3. The panels in Figure 3 from top to bottom show the volume fraction of ice ( fice ), the temperature (T), the log of total pressure (log 10 P), and porosity ( ϕ). All quan-tities are plotted as a function of depth and at 9 di ff er-ent times, only plotting times during the heating event, 

t < τ .To calculate the ice volume fraction, we first calculate the number density fraction of a solid species (denoted 8Table 2: Fiducial Values 

Parameter Variable Value Reference Orbital Radius ao 5 [AU] Initial Nebula Gas Density ρgas (ao=5 AU) ∼ 1.9 × 10 −10 [kg m −3] Equation 27 Initial Temperature Tgas (ao=5 AU) ∼ 67 [K] Equation 28 Initial Porosity ϕ 0.5 Ballouz et al. (2026); Ryan et al. (2026) Pore Diameter dp 10 −6 [m] Transient Heating Event’s Strength Γ 5Integration Duration 360 [sec] Integration Time-step ∆t Appendix A Decay Timescale τ 360 [sec] Grid Length 0.04 [m] Grid Resolution ∆x 0.001 [m]        

> We set the initial gas pressure within the body to be the vapor pressure of the volatile gas (Equation 25). After the simulation starts, there is a short transient period where the pressure, gas number density, and temperature return to ideal gas conditions, which can be seen as the jump in pressure at t =0 sec and t =30 sec in Figures 3, 4, 5. We set the initial porosity to ϕ=0.5, agreeing with the low-end estimates of asteroid porosities from Ballouz et al. (2026); Ryan et al. (2026).

by index i) compared to that same solid species assum-ing there is no void space, 

fn,i = ns,imi

ρi

. (34) This is the same as a volume fraction due to the sizes of molecules being compared being equal. Due to being a porous body, we account for void space by dividing this volume fraction by the total volume fraction occupied by solids, 

fice = fn,ice 

fn,ice + fn,rock 

. (35) Figure 3 shows that as the hot nebular gas enters the cool porous body, an ice deposition front forms. The deposition front is located at a depth where the pressure within the porous body drop below the vapor pressure of water. The peak ice deposition volume fraction is low, never exceeding 10 −9.When the temperature gradient is large near the de-position front, the temperature at the deposition front is su ffi ciently below the required temperature for deposi-tion meaning ices are unlikely to di ff use deeper before depositing. The deposition front is initially contained within a narrow spatial band; however, as the tempera-ture gradient decreases, the deposition front widens (see the later times in Figure 3 top and bottom panels). When the temperature gradient is low, a wider spatial region is near the sublimation temperature, leading to deposition over a wider range of depth. With an initially dry porous body the environmental volatiles cause a small increase in the pressure within the porous body, this increase being within an order of magnitude greater than the ambient pressure. The third panel from top in Figure 3 shows that the ambient pres-sure is about 0.1 Pa but pressure in the pores reaches a value that is few Pa. 

3.2. An Initially Icy Body 

In this section, we discuss a simulation of a cool, porous, and initially icy body exposed to a transiently heated nebular environment. The porous body initially contains 1% ice by solid volume fraction. The icy body simulation, denoted Run 2, di ff ers from Run 1 only by the initial ice fraction (See Table 3 for parameters). The icy body simulation is displayed in Figure 4 and is sim-ilar to Figure 3. Figure 4 shows that, due to the native ices present within the porous body being incorporated into the de-position front, there is a significant increase in the ice volume fraction ( fice ) at the deposition front. The depo-sition front advances much slower in an icy body when compared to a dry body. The sublimation of these na-tive ices is associated with a high gas pressure (See Fig-ure 4), with the peak pressure located at the sublima-tion front exceeding 100 Pa. The peak pressure is much higher than in the simulation of the dry body shown in Figure 3. In the icy body simulation we see a sublimation front that advances into the body as the body heats. At depths shallower than the front, the vapor outgasses and the medium is dry because ice that was initially present has been sublimated. At depths deeper than the sublimation 9Table 3: Simulation Runs With Initial Parameters 

Run Increment ao [AU] dp [m] ϕ Γ τ [s] fice Volatile Gas Figure Number Species Fraction 1 - 5 10 −6 0.5 5 360 0.00 H2O 10 −4 32 - 5 10 −6 0.5 5 360 0.01 H2O 10 −4 4,5,10 3 - 5 10 −8 0.5 5 360 0.01 H2O 10 −4 54 - 5 10 −6 0.5 10 360 0.01 H2O 10 −4 75 - 5 10 −6 0.5 5 360 0.01 CO 2 10 −5 10 6 - 55 10 −6 0.5 5 360 0.01 CO 10 −5 10 7-11 ×0.1 5 10 −5 − 10 −9 0.5 5 360 0.01 H2O 10 −4 612-20 1 5 10 −6 0.5 2-10 360 0.01 H2O 10 −4 821-26 360 5 10 −6 0.5 5 360-2160 0.01 H2O 10 −4 927-35 0.05 5 10 −6 0.9-0.5 5 360 0.01 H2O 10 −4 11,12   

> The parameters listed are simulation orbital radius, pore diameter ( dp), transient heating event’s strength as a multiplier of the temperature ( Γ), Decay Timescale ( τ), initial ice volume fraction of the body ( fice ), the volatile species being simulated, and the fraction of the environmental gas for which the volatile comprises. For Runs 7 - 11, we set the pore diameter, dp, to di ff erent values, in increments of an order of magnitude. The gas fractions used are motivated by Du and Bergin 2014 (H 2O) and Bosman et al. 2018 (CO, CO 2). Runs 3 and 4 are identical to Runs 10 and 20, however we list them separately for ease of viewing due to being frequently referred to.

front, ice is still present in the body. The simulations by Warning et al. (2015) of microwave heated icy beef under low pressure displayed a sublimation front similar to that seen in our icy body. However the application was freeze drying of meat, so heating took place long enough to entirely dry the substrate. At a depth just below the sublimation front our sim-ulation, Figure 4 shows a layer where ice has a higher volume fraction than was initially present. Some of the vapor that was sublimated from material near the sur-face did not escape the body but instead was deposited into this layer. In the dry body simulation, the ice depo-sition layer consists only of ice deposited from nebular vapor. In the initially icy body, the ice in the deposi-tion layer originates from the body itself. An ice de-position layer was not seen in the comet simulations by (Bouziani and Jewitt, 2022), however their simulations did not allow vapor to penetrate into the porous medium below the sublimation front. Simulations of comet out-gassing that allow sublimated material to penetrate be-low the sublimation front display ice deposition below the sublimation front (Zivithal et al., 2025). Due to out-gassing of sublimated material in confined pore spaces, the pressure (third panel from top) in Fig-ure 4 reaches a maximum beyond 100 Pa, exceeding the maximum seen in the dry body. 

3.2.1. Caveats: Constant Pore Diameter 

In our simulations we adopt a single, fixed pore diam-eter in a single simulation, but we allow porosity to vary. A more realistic simulation could take into account a distribution of pore sizes and allow variations in mean pore diameter and the pore diameter distribution. We additionally assume all pores are open pores and con-nected to one another, while a more realistic simulation could allow for some fraction of pores to begin as closed pores, or to allow for pores to become closed due to the ice deposition front. 

3.2.2. Caveats: Solid Ice Fraction 

We limited this study to a low initial solid ice volume fraction of 1% due to the simplifying assumptions made in Sections 2.2.1 – 2.2.2. If the initial ice content is higher, the gas pressure within pores can be high enough that molecule-molecule interactions become important. This regime could be explored in future work. 

3.3. Sensitivity to Pore Diameter 

In this section, we run simulations similar to the ini-tially icy body of Run 2, but vary the pore diameter (See Table 3: Runs 2, 3, 7–11). Run 3 is similar to Run 2 but has a pore diameter that is 100 times smaller. Runs 7–11 are similar to Run 2 but have pore diameters spanning 10 −5 to 10 −9 m. We simulate two porous bodies with di ff erent pore sizes of dp = 10 −6 m and dp = 10 −8 m (shown in Fig-ure 5). With a pore diameter dp = 10 −8 m, we find that peak pressure approaches 10 4 Pa, or 0.1 atm. This is an order of magnitude greater than that of pore diameter 

dp = 10 −6 m. In all cases tested, the peak pressure is 10 Figure 3: This plot shows the results of Run 1 (with parameters listed in Table 3), an initially dry body is exposed to a heated environment containing water vapor. The x-axis is depth from the body’s surface. From top to bottom, panels show ice fraction, gas temperature, log 10 

pressure within the pores, and porosity. The plotted pressure is the total pressure within the pores, not the partial pressure of the volatile. Each curve shows a di ff erent simulation time with 0 sec correspond-ing to the time that the ambient temperature begins to rise. At t =

0 sec, the initial pressure is set at the vapor pressure of the volatile component. There is a short transient period where the pressure, gas number density, and temperature adjust to the ideal gas law, which is achieved by t = 30 sec. At each time, there is a peak in the ice fraction corresponding to an ice deposition front that advances into the body. As expected, the ice fraction and variation in porosity are inversely proportional, as the amount of rocky material is fixed. 

near the sublimation front. We find the depth of the de-position front along with the ice fraction peak decreases for smaller pore diameters. With a pore diameter of dp = 10 −6 m, deposi-tion fronts are deeper with a pressure approximately 10 times lower after 30 seconds. While higher pressures can rapidly deposit ice, we find a lower deposition rate at higher pressures, likely attributed to less e ffi cient dif-fusion through smaller pores. Less di ff usion leads to 

Figure 4: We show a simulation of an initially icy body, denoted Run 2, with parameters listed in in Table 3). This body initially has 1% ice by volume. This Figure is similar to Figure 3 that shows a simulation of an initially dry body. In the top panel, we see an ice deposition layer that is significantly higher in ice volume fraction compared to that seen in Figure 3 of the initially dry body. The peak pressure (in the third panel) is much higher in the icy body. The advance speed of the ice deposition layer is slower than in the dry body. In the top 0.5 cm, the medium is dry as ice has been sublimated from the layer. Between a depth of 0.5 cm and 1 cm, sublimated gas has been deposited as ice, increasing the fraction of ice in a thin layer. The sublimation front and ice deposition layer are illustrated in Figure 2. 

less internal movement of volatile gases after sublima-tion occurs. We run a suite of simulations varying the pore diam-eter (See Figure 6 and Table 3, Runs 7–11), tracking the depth of the start of the ice deposition front (the depth at which the volume ice fraction exceeds the initial ice fraction prior to the heating event) as well as the column density of deposited ices. This column density does not take into account mass which is lost to the environment, only the deposited ice which exceeds the initial ice frac-tion. We find that increasing the pore size increases both 11 Figure 5: We plot the ice fraction and the internal pressure as a function of distance for Runs 2 and 3, an initially icy body with pore diameters of         

> dp=10 −6m and dp=10 −8m. This icy body is initially 1% ice by volume. Top Left: We find that as the deposition front moves deeper below the surface over time, the ice contained within the deposition front increases. Bottom Left: We find the pressure within the pores increases significantly due to the continuous sublimation of the native ice within the body in contrast with the relatively lower, gradual pressures for an initially dry grain (see Figure 3 At any given time, the peak pressure is located near the deposition front, indicating that this pressure is due to sublimation of the internal volatiles. Top Right: We find that by decreasing the pore diameter, dp, we decrease the depth of the deposition front at any given time when compared to that for a larger pore diameter. With the smaller pore diameters, the deposition front travels more slowly and begins to stop in place. Bottom Right: Decreasing the pore diameter leads to a significant increase in the pressure within the porous body. The peak pressure is located near the peak of the sublimation /deposition front.

the depth of the deposition front as well as the quantity of ice deposited within the deposition front. At small pore diameters, di ff usion is less e ffi cient and the deposition front is not able to penetrate deeply be-neath the surface. Additionally, very little material is incorporated into the deposition front. As the pore di-ameter increases beyond dp = 10 −8 m, ice deposition is more substantial as well as moves deeper beneath the surface. 

3.4. Sensitivity to Transient Heating Event Strength 

In this section, we investigate the e ff ects of transient heating event strength on the volatile deposition front in an initially icy, porous body. The exact conditions of the runs can be found in Table 3 for Runs 2 (icy body), 4 ( Γ = 10), and 12-20. Here, Run 4 is similar to Run 2 but is an example of higher transient heating event strength, Γ. Runs 12-20 are similar to Run 2 but cover a range of Γ. We refer to a strong event as a high temperature in a protoplanetary disk. We do not have a detailed nebular shock model (e.g., Ciesla and Hood 2002); however, we approximate the e ff ects of a shock by scaling the temperature and gas number density by a multiplier, Γ, and the pressure by the square of the multiplier, Γ2. The Γ required for deposition fronts to occur depend on the ambient environmental conditions, requiring the max temperature, pressure, and density to support gaseous volatiles. The fiducial transient heating event strength, Γ = 5, demonstrated in Figure 4, increases the nebular temper-ature and gas number density by 5 times and pressure by 25 times those of the ambient conditions. We simu-late a range of values from Γ = 2 to 10, with specific run conditions listed in Table 3. 12 Figure 6: In this plot we show the total ice deposition (on the y-axis) and the final depth of the deposition front (on the x-axis) for a range of pore diameters, dp (shown in color with color bar on the right). The runs plotted are Runs 7-11 which parameters listed in Table 3. We find that for pore diameters smaller than dp = 10 −8 m, there is minimal ice deposition. 

Figure 7 shows the ice fraction for Runs 2 and 4. We find that weaker transient heating events lead to less deposited ice, along with the ice that is deposited be-ing located closer to the surface. This is expected be-cause a majority of the deposition front is associated with the native ices. As such, lower transient heating event strengths lead to less heating of the subsurface material, less sublimation, and subsequently less inter-nal deposition. The opposite e ff ect is seen for higher strength events. Figure 8 shows the total ice in the deposition front as a function of deposition depth for 8 simulations that di ff er in Γ. As more of the body is heated, more volatiles sublimate and travel deeper beneath the surface. 

3.5. Sensitivity to Transient Event Decay Timescale 

In this section, we vary the decay timescale, τ, for our simulations. We show the simulation parameters for these runs in Table 3. We vary the decay timescale from 360 sec up to 2160 sec while keeping our simulation du-ration at 360 sec. As we increase the decay timescale, Figure 9 shows the deposition front moves deeper be-low the surface before becoming stationary due to the environmental temperatures being elevated for a longer duration. The amount of material within the deposi-tion front also increases with longer heating events due to more locally sublimated volatiles being incorporated into the deposition front.       

> Figure 7: We plot the ice fraction as a function of depth and time throughout the simulation for Runs 2 and 4. Initially icy grains with di ff erent transient heating event strengths, Γ = 5 (Top) and Γ = 10 (Bottom). We find that increasing Γallows for heat, and subsequently the deposition front, to travel deeper beneath the surface of the body. For an initially icy body, the peak ice volume fraction is greater due to more native ice being incorporated in the deposition front.

3.6. Other Volatiles (CO, CO 2)

We have found that water-ice sublimates and sub-sequently deposits within a porous body’s surface. In this section, we simulate transient heating events for two common carbon-bearing molecules, CO and CO 2,the building blocks of organic molecules (Aikawa et al., 1999). Here, we show that these volatiles undergo de-position and sublimation phenomena similar to those of H2O but at di ff erent orbital radii. Using JWST /NIRSpec to observe Solar System bod-ies, CO and CO 2 ices have been detected on KBO /TNO surfaces at orbital radii of 30 to 50 AU (De Prá et al., 2025; Markwardt et al., 2025; Cryan et al., 2025). H 2Oand CO 2 ices with little to no CO ice have been de-tected on KBO surfaces at 40 AU (Wong et al., 2025), on Saturnian moons at orbital radii of 10 AU (Belyakov and Brown, 2025; Brown et al., 2025), and on Jupiter’s moons and Trojans at orbital radii of 5 AU (Wong et al., 2024; Sharkey et al., 2025). Outside our Solar System, cold CO and CO 2 have been observed within icy layers at di ff erent heights of protoplanetary disk around low-mass pre-main sequence stars (e.g. Powell et al. 2022, Sturm et al. 2023b, Sturm et al. 2023a). Since ice-phase CO and CO 2 can survive at a wide range of orbital radii, we simulate CO and CO 2 at or-bital radii based on their freeze-out temperatures, as-suming the disk midplane temperature calculated us-13 Figure 8: We plot the depth at which the deposition front begins versus the total ice deposited within the deposition front at the end of the sim-ulation (t = 360 sec) for a range of transient heating event strengths, Runs 12-20 with parameters listed in Table 3. We denote the event strength as Γ, where Γ = 5 indicates a transient heating event with peak conditions 5 times that of the ambient environmental tempera-ture and pressure. We hold all other variables constant while varying      

> Γ, with the fiducial values for non-varying parameters given in Table 2. Given our fiducial values, transient heating events with Γ≤3 re-sult in negligible deposition. The Γrequired for deposition fronts to occur depend on the ambient environmental conditions, requiring the max temperature, pressure, and density to support gaseous volatiles. Stronger transient heating events result in volatile deposition fronts to be deeper below the surface and have accumulated more material.

ing Equation 28. Similar to interplanetary H 2O ice, in-terplanetary CO 2 becomes an icy solid below its triple point at 200 K, corresponding to an orbital radius within the midplane of 1 AU. We choose 5 AU, similar to our choice for H 2O. CO in mixtures with water-ice and /or N2, chemically due to desorption, tends to be stable at a narrower temperature range than its triple point (60 K) between 10 and 40 K (e.g. Palumbo 1997, Öberg et al. 2005, Visser et al. 2009, Qi and Wilner 2024), which for 20 K corresponds to an orbital radius within the mid-plane of 50 AU. We choose to model CO at 55 AU to guarantee that all CO is initially frozen and chemically stable. We expect volatile species to behave independently of one another because molecule-molecule interactions are rarer compared to molecular-wall interactions for the relatively low partial pressures and gas number densi-ties expected within small pores (see Section 2.1). If a volatile has a sublimation temperature near in value to the peak temperature caused by a nebular shock, then a given sublimated volatile may eventually cool at dif-ferent depths for each resulting deposition front. Mul-   

> Figure 9: We plot the depth at which the deposition front begins versus the total ice deposited within the deposition front at the end of the simulation (t =360 sec) for a range of decay timescales, Runs 21-26 with parameters listed in Table 3. The decay timescale, τ, determines the decay rate as shown in Equation 31. We hold all other variables constant while varying the transient heating event strength, with the fiducial values for non-varying parameters given in Table 2. Longer duration heating events result in deeper volatile deposition fronts with more accumulated material.

tiple deposition fronts can exist within a porous body at once, with each deposition front comprising a sin-gle volatile. Within a given simulation we only track a single volatile, since multiple deposition fronts within a body act nearly independently of one another. The physical properties for each volatile are listed in Table 1. For each volatile we simulate, sublimation oc-curs at di ff erent combinations of gas temperature and total pressure. Deposition fronts of H 2O, CO 2, and CO, shown in Figure 10, all have similar profile shapes as a function of depth with a spike in ice fraction followed by rapid decay. 

3.7. Sensitivity to Porosity 

We investigate the e ff ects of varying the porosity, ϕ,of the porous body from 0.9 to 0.1. The simulation con-ditions for these runs can be found in Table 3, Runs 27 - 35. For porosity ϕ = 0.9 and ϕ = 0.5, we plot ice vol-ume fraction fice and pressure in Figure 11. We find that as porosity increases, the deposition front penetrates deeper below the surface while simultaneously exhibit-ing lower peak pressures. With a porosity of ϕ = 0.5, there is a small but noticeable decrease in the peak ice fraction as well as an order of magnitude increase in the peak pressure when compared to ϕ = 0.9. As shown in Figure 12, the relatively lower peak ice fraction does 14 Figure 10: We plot the ice fraction as a function of depth at t = 360 sec for 3 di ff erent volatile ices: H 2O, CO 2, and CO (Runs 2, 5, and 6). The orbital radius and volatile gas fraction. Environmental conditions (a o and gas fraction) are not the same between volatiles shown, with the parameters for each simulation listed in Table 3. Since simulating each volatile at di ff erent orbital radii results in similar ice fractions de-posited, ice deposition fronts can occur throughout the protoplanetary disk, mainly varying in depth. 

not correlate with a lower total amount of ice deposi-tion. More porous objects have less total solid mate-rial, resulting in higher ice fractions but less total ice deposited. Changes in porosity have an analogous e ff ect to changes in pore diameter on deposition front depth, peak ice fraction, and internal pressure. Increased porosity refers to an increase in the total void space within an object, while increased pore diameter refers to an increase in the void space contained within a single pore. This increase in void space, whether it be that con-tained within individual pores or the object as a whole, result in increased peak ice fractions and a decrease in the peak pressure. 

4. Discussion 

4.1. Longer Duration Heating Events 

Chondrules form due to short-duration, hours-long nebular shocks set by the cooling time of the disk (De-sch and Connolly, 2002), requiring cooling times of 100–1000 K /hr (Yu et al., 1995). Our simulated disk undergoing a transient heating event with Γ = 10 and 

τ = 360 sec would decay back to ambient conditions after 1 hour. This is an average cooling time of approxi-mately 600 K /hr. Our simulation cools non-linearly. For the first 360 sec, our cooling rate is much more rapid with a variable slope on the order of 1000 K /hr. Short heating events with small decay timescales are also a proxy for larger porous bodies experiencing hours-long heating events. Due to gas drag, small par-ticles move with the gas. However, objects exceeding the size-scale of meters are less well coupled to the gas. Any di ff erence between gas and orbital velocity would allow a large object to pass through a shock. The dura-tion of a transient heating event experienced by a large porous body could be shorter than that experienced by a mm-sized grain. While the decay rate in this simula-tion aligned with those of nebular shocks, the heating events associated with spiral density waves explored by Podolak et al. (2011) could last for months, giving rise to long duration heating events for large decoupled bod-ies. Using Equation 33, a month long heating event has a skin depth of ∼ 200 m. Large porous planetes-imals would be capable of sequestering and enhancing the ice content below their surfaces during these long-term heating events. 

4.2. Can Significant Amounts of Ice From Disk Volatiles be Deposited Within an Initially Dry Body? 

In our initially dry body simulation of a transient heating event (Run 1, Figure 3), we found only small quantities of water vapor from the nebular gas was de-posited as ice within the porous body. Increasing the initial ice content (See Run 2, Figure 4), we find the nebular volatile gas fraction does not strongly influence the ice deposition front because the volatiles are present primarily from local sublimation. As the fraction of ice deposited is proportional to the volatile vapor pressure in the hot disk, a higher nebula gas density or a higher volatile gas fraction during the event could increase the amount of ice deposited, allowing for significant depo-sition fronts in dry bodies and external enrichment for deposition fronts in icy bodies. Settling can increase the mass fraction of volatiles near the disk’s midplane. We follow the work by Du and Bergin (2014), who model the protoplanetary disk’s midplane warm water gas fraction between 1–1.2 AU using a gas fraction XH2O ≈ 10 −4. We take the abun-dance of H 2O beyond the water ice line to be XH2O ≈

10 −4 (Bosman et al., 2018). Note that we put a short de-cay timescale for the volatile vapor to cool in the sim-ulation; however, it may take days or weeks for water vapor to reform into ice aggregates or condense onto rims of dust particles (Sirono and Furuta, 2024). This deposition is primarily located on the surfaces of ob-jects, indicating enrichment of environmental volatiles would be required for subsurface deposition fronts to be enhanced. Being located in the disk midplane is insu ffi cient to allow for significant subsurface deposition within the 15 Figure 11: We plot the ice fraction and the internal pressure as a function of distance for Runs 27 and 35, an initially icy body with porosity of ϕ =    

> 0.9 and ϕ=0.5. This icy body is initially 1% ice by volume. Top: We find increasing the porosity results in a deposition front which penetrates deeper below the surface compared to a less porous body. With increased porosity, the deposition front occupies a greater fraction of solid material when compared to a less porous body. We find increased porosity results in a more massive deposition front which penetrates deeper below the surface when compared to a less porous body in the same heating event. Bottom: We find increased porosity results in lower peak pressures, with the pressure di ff erence being nearly an order of magnitude between the extreme ends of the simulated range.

deposition front, thus we consider other methods of en-hancing the volatile gas density. Spiral density waves can increase the local gas density by a factor of a few (Dong et al., 2015; Ziampras et al., 2020; Cimerman and Rafikov, 2021). However, the peak ice fraction in Run 1 is so low that volatile gas densities would need to be multiple orders of magnitude higher than what we assumed in order to have a significant e ff ect on the de-position quantity. Another method to enhance ice depo-sition into initially dry bodies could be the collision of icy planetesimals (Stewart et al., 2025). Collisions in-crease the density of water vapor into a jet (compared to the ambient level in the disk) by an order of magnitude. In the nebular and bow shock models for chondrule formation, there is a variation in the gas velocity asso-ciated with the heating event. A recently formed chon-drule can be destroyed by impacts from smaller particles with shorter stopping times (Jacquet and Thompson, 2014). A lower temperature heating event, if it involved acceleration of the gas, could also cause collisions be-tween particles. Particles with di ff erent stopping times could experience varied collisions, and porous body sur-faces could be processed due to collisions with smaller particles. Collisions between small particles could be a source of nebular volatile vapor deposited inside a porous body if the porous body’s interior acts as a cold sink. To summarize, even though spiral density waves and jets from icy planetesimal collisions can increase the local gas disk density, the ambient disk pressure and volatile fraction are so low that a short-duration tran-sient heating event (of an hour or so) cannot signifi-cantly move ice from an icy grain reservoir into porous body centers during the event itself. 16 Figure 12: We plot the depth at which the deposition front begins vs the total ice deposited within the deposition front at the end of the simulation (t = 360 sec) for a range of porosities, Runs 27 - 35 in Table 3. We find the depth of the deposition front is dependent on the porosity, however it is a weak dependency when compared to other tested parameters ( dp, Γ, τ). 

4.3. Shielding and Transport 

We discuss the possibility of ice deposition fronts in shielding volatiles from future heating events and trans-porting volatiles throughout regions of a protoplanetary disk. Ices that are deposited in the interior of a porous body could be shielded from subsequent short-term heating events. After an ice deposition front forms due to a heating event, a dry outer shell will form unless sig-nificant deposition occurs on the surface layer, as was discussed in Section 4.2. We carried out simulations of sequential heating events, finding that a dry, porous outer shell heats quicker than an equivalent icy volume, allowing sequential heating events to continue moving ices deeper inside a porous body up until a deposition front is beyond the skin depth of a dry porous body for the encountered heating event. The icy body can then be transported to a di ff erent region of the disk or be accreted onto a planet or planetesimal, carrying with it ices sequestered beneath its surface, keeping volatile ices entrapped within less volatile ices (Ligterink et al., 2024; Williams et al., 2025), and sublimating volatiles as it is transported into the inner disk (Krijt et al., 2018; Schneider and Bitsch, 2021). 

4.4. CO Depletion and Enhancement 

We discuss the implications of ice deposition fronts in the context of CO enhancement and depletion within protoplanetary disks. Sequestering CO within H 2O and CO 2 ices is pro-posed within small porous bodies to retain CO in re-gions where sublimation occurs, depleting CO in the disk environment (Williams et al., 2025). Host H 2Oand CO 2 ices can entrap and enhance CO near the host ice’s snow-lines (Ligterink et al., 2024; Williams et al., 2025). CO 2 ices may more e ffi ciently entrap CO than H2O ices can (Simon et al., 2019). Host ices trapping CO could be extended to ice de-position fronts within larger porous bodies. Since CO 2

and CO ice deposition fronts occur deeper than an H 2Oice deposition front, if the native ice content is great enough, then the CO 2 deposition front could trap CO within closed pores. With multiple deposition fronts, CO could be sequestered by both H 2O and CO 2. CO would be unlikely to be entrapped within a newly form-ing deposition front due to CO sublimating at much lower temperatures than H 2O and CO 2. However, if an enclosed region forms, volatiles entrapped within this region would be shielded from heating events, allowing for entrapment and transport of materials throughout the disk in the interiors of planetesimals. 

4.5. Modeling Protoplanetary Disk Dust Grain Size Distributions 

Understanding how transient heating events alter the surface and subsurface morphology of porous pebbles and planetesimals may help to model the mass of porous dust grains distributed within protoplanetary disks. Guerra-Alvarado et al. (2024) modeled the Spectral Energy Distribution (SED) of HL Tau, a T Tauri star. The dust model for the SED took advantage of ALMA mm continuum images, which trace colder dust in the disk midplane and outer disk, to test the e ff ects of poros-ity on dust mass estimates. They found porous grains result in a disk mass that is 3x greater than that found using compact grains. Shi et al. (2026) modeled the SED of MWC 480, a Herbig Ae /Be star. The dust emission model took ad-vantage of ALMA mm continuum images and VLA cm continuum images, testing di ff erent grain size dis-tributions and dust properties, including porosity. They found the compact grain model results in 3x to 6x the disk mass compared to that of the porous grain disk model. Pre-main sequence stars, according to models of ALMA and VLA images and SEDs, may contain meter-sized porous pebbles within 30–60 AU (Zhang et al., 2023; Shi et al., 2026), which may sequester ices during transient heating events (See Section 3). 17 Heating events which result in the loss of ices in small initially porous icy grains result in increased porosity for these grains, or increased surface porosity for larger bodies as a dry region is formed. Gonzalez and Mi-choulier (2026) find porous grains may elevate dust-gas mass ratios. Additionally, simulations by Michoulier et al. (2024) find that taking into account the change in the fragmentation line due to the CO snowline results in an increased dust-gas mass ratio when compared to not simulating a CO snowline. 

4.6. High Pore Pressures 

We ask whether the gas pressure during a transient heating event could cause fractures or brittle or ductile material failure within a porous body. Observations of dust jets from Comet 19P /Borrelly by the Deep Space 1 mission inferred subsurface tem-perature and pressure close to water’s triple point (Yelle et al., 2004). The primary proposed mechanism allow-ing liquid water to form in small Solar System bodies is due to short-lived, hot radionuclides that were incor-porated into 5—500 km sized bodies shortly after the formation of the solar nebula (Wallis, 1980). Capillary suction due to microporosity enhances the physical strength of porous, wet materials (Miles and Faillace, 2012) so that solid crusts prevent volatiles from escape, forcing volatile buildup inside comets (Sheldon and Hoover, 2005; Miles and Faillace, 2012). If the liq-uid phase becomes supersaturated with gas, then a heat pulse can trigger the sudden release of dissolved gases, leading to an outburst. In Run 3 (see Figure 5), pore pressures approach 10 4

Pa, about 10 times higher than the triple point of wa-ter, suggesting that liquid water can condense within the porous body given appropriate temperatures, pore size, and initial ice fraction. Tensile strength within asteroids and planetesimals inferred from porous collections of soda-lime glass (Sakurai et al., 2025), or following a formulation for tensile strength of aggregate and porous non-aggregate monomers (Kimura et al., 2020; Kimura et al., 2025), predict strengths on the order of 10 4 − 10 5 Pa for boul-ders and icy aggregates. We find smaller pore diame-ters, stronger heating events and thus rapid heating, or increased ice reservoirs can lead to pressures approach-ing the strength of the body (See Figure 5), potentially causing an outburst that ejects material. Such an out-burst would be similar to a cometary outburst (Bischo ff 

et al., 2018) but caused by transient heating of a porous planetesimal in a circumstellar disk, rather than due to solar illumination. We carried out additional simula-tions with an initial ice volume fraction of 5%, find-ing increased initial ice content results in higher pres-sure, which could point to liquid water or fragmenta-tion. However, this high pressure approaches regimes where Knudsen di ff usion is no longer a good approxi-mation and advective transport becomes relevant in the presence of liquids, both of which are neglected as sim-plifications in our simulations. 

4.7. Implications for Aqueous Alteration 

Solutes, such as inorganic salts, can facilitate melt-ing volatile ices within Solar System bodies of all sizes. Secondary minerals, such as iron sulfide (FeS) assem-blages identified in the returned Comet 81P /Wild 2 samples could have been formed by low-temperature aqueous alteration (Berger et al., 2011), though well-preserved phyllosilicates are absent. Alternatively, aqueously altered material could have been incorpo-rated into the comet body during its formation rather than due to cometary activity after formation (Ogliore, 2023). Fibrous mackinawite (composed of FeS), dis-covered in samples of the asteroid Bennu returned by the OSIRIS-REx mission (Benner et al., 2026), is likely formed via precipitation from solution at temperatures up to 70 ◦ C. Laboratory experiments find that hydrated silicates rapidly form from sub-micrometer amorphous silicates at room temperature in mildly alkaline solution, giv-ing an alternative scenario for aqueous alteration of in-terplanetary dust particles (Nakamura-Messenger et al., 2011). While a number of laboratory experiments and mechanisms have been proposed for aqueous alteration in small, short-lived deposits of water in primordial ma-terials, so far we lack definitive signatures that such pro-cesses took place. We find that transient heating events can approach conditions allowing for liquid water to be present within porous icy bodies. Due to simplifications made regard-ing heat and mass transport (See Sections 2.1, 2.2.2), we cannot predict the presence of liquid water. This is a topic of future work, further discussed in Section 5.1. 

5. Summary 

In this paper, we have explored how a porous body that has a size greater than a few cm and is embedded in a protoplanetary disk could be a ff ected by a tran-sient event that heats the ambient disk gas. We use 1-dimensional time dependent energy and mass transport equations as a function of depth within the body that take into account Knudsen Di ff usion, sublimation and deposition of volatiles, and heating of an inert porous 18 substrate. We assume a short transient heating event of 360 seconds and discussion of longer duration heating events can be found in Section 4.1. In the Knudsen dif-fusion limit, where the gas density is low, gas di ff usion through the porous medium can be separately simulated for each volatile. For a volatile such as water vapor, our simulations show an advancing front consisting of sublimation on one side and deposition of ice on the other side. For short, 6 minute heating events, we find that the phenomenon of subsurface ice deposition, pre-viously seen in comet simulations (e.g., Kossacki et al. 2015; Spohn et al. 2015; Zivithal et al. 2025), is also likely to occur on 10 cm and greater sized porous bod-ies during transient heating events in the protoplanetary disk. We find the depth and amount of ice in a deposi-tion front are strongly dependent on pore size, initial ice quantity, peak temperature, and duration of the heating event. Due to the low pressure in a circumstellar disk, in a solid body that is initially dry, the amount of nebu-lar material deposited as ice is negligible, as illustrated in Figure 3. However, if the body is initially icy, then locally sublimated gas can accumulate in the advancing deposition front. For example, the deposition front in the simulation of an initially icy body shown in Figure 4 has an ice volume fraction that is a few times higher than the initial ice fraction. We find that with a smaller pore diameter, lower porosity, lower peak temperature, and shorter decay timescale, the peak ice volume fraction within the deposition front decreases. This decrease in peak ice fraction often corresponds to a decrease in the column density of the deposited material, however, the opposite is true when decreasing porosity. Due to lower porosity increasing the total amount of rocky substrate, the peak ice fraction is lower while the column density of deposited material is greater (See Figures 11, 12). In all other cases, changes in peak ice fraction and column density of deposited material are correlated. We find the peak internal pressure due to sublimation depends strongly on pore diameter and porosity. De-creasing the pore diameter leads to a larger peak pres-sure, with internal pressures exceeding 10 3 Pa and ap-proaching 10 4 Pa at a pore diameter of dp = 10 −8 m. We find that decreasing porosity leads to an increase in the peak internal pressure, where the peak internal pressure di ff ers by nearly an order of magnitude when comparing porous bodies with a porosity of ϕ = 0.9 and ϕ = 0.5. If the pore size is small, then the maximum subsur-face pressure reached near the ice deposition layer could be high enough to fracture the material or condense liquid water. In the context of comets, high pressures could account for outbursts. Here, we find that high pressure in pores could have occurred in porous plan-etesimals due to transient heating in a protoplanetary disk. The presence of liquid water has been proposed in comets (e.g., Sheldon and Hoover 2005; Miles and Faillace 2012). We suggest that pockets of liquid water caused by transient heating, even if short-lived, might allow formation of iron sulfides or salts. Consequently, transient heating events could cause some aqueous al-teration. Localized aqueous alteration associated with transient heating could occur in a low pressure environ-ment that is external to the interiors of larger planetes-imals and where aqueous alteration is usually assumed to occur (Wallis, 1980). Our simulations of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide (See Section 3.6) suggest that volatile ice de-position layers caused by heating events could occur on porous planetesimals throughout a protoplanetary disk. However, transient heating events would not a ff ect all volatiles in the same way. For example, a weak transient event could cause CO to sublimate and be deposited in a porous body in the outer solar system, but water and carbon dioxide would be sublimated and deposited in higher temperature events that could have occurred in the asteroid belt. Due to their di ff erent vapor pressure temperature dependence, carbon dioxide ice and water ice would be deposited at di ff erent depths in a single body. We found that an initially dry body did not acquire much ice during a single short heating event from neb-ular water vapor. However, the disk is likely to retain volatile vapor until either it escapes the system or is eventually incorporated as ice on the surface of grains or larger bodies. After a transient heating event, the surface of a larger body could accumulate a layer of ice on its surface from water vapor that remains in the disk (Sirono and Furuta, 2024). After a series of heat-ing events, a porous body could have more than one ice layer for a given volatile. 

5.1. Future work 

Future studies can improve the numerical method and carry out simulations of longer duration events. To improve the numerical method, the integration can be taken to higher order, and we could take into account molecular collisions and integrate multiple volatile species simultaneously. Were we to allow pore size vari-ations during the simulation, we could simulate bodies with initially higher ice fractions. We used a 1D model, but sublimation fronts need not be planar. Neutron imaging of vacuum freeze drying has revealed channels and fingering in the distribution of ice in porous media (Vorhauer-Huget et al., 2020). 19 Vorhauer-Huget et al. (2020) attributed this structure to variations in the pore size distribution. These simula-tions may place constraints on porosity and tortuosity distributions inside primordial bodies, their subsurface structure, and di ff ering evolutionary scenarios. Some of our simulations displayed high pore pres-sure, suggesting pressures high enough to condense liq-uid water. Numerous studies have focused on aqueous alteration inside bodies that are large enough to have central pressures above the triple point of water. The possibility of short-lived pockets of liquid water is in-triguing, particularly if in the future we could identify an associated chemical signature, such as a type of salt or sulfide. The liquid water pockets might uniquely form in a time that is short compared to the thousands or mil-lions of years for aqueous alteration processes inside large bodies (greater than a few km) that have central pressures above water’s triple point pressure. 

Acknowledgments: This material is based upon work supported by NASA, USA grant 80NSSC21K0143. ——————————————————— 

References 

Aikawa, Y., Umebayashi, T., Nakano, T., Miyama, S.M., 1999. Evolution of Molecular Abundances in Protoplanetary Disks with Accretion Flow. The Astrophysical Journal 519, 705–725. doi: 10.1086/ 307400 .Anthony, J.W., Bideaux, R.A., Bladh, K.W., Nichols, M.C., 2001. Handbook of mineralogy. volume 1. Mineral Data Publ. Ashby, M., Shercli ff , H., Cebon, D., 2019. Chap-ter 12 - materials and heat, in: Ashby, M., Shercli ff , H., Cebon, D. (Eds.), Materials (Fourth Edition). fourth edition ed.. Butterworth-Heinemann, pp. 303–333. URL: https: //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ pii/B9780081023761000123 , doi: https://doi. org/10.1016/B978-0-08-102376-1.00012-3 .Ballouz, R.L., Ryan, A.J., Macke, R.J., Barnouin, O.S., Lê, M., Moreno, J., Eckley, S., Hanton, L., Hildebrand, A., Toy-Edens, V., Meier, R.M., Berkson, M., Asphaug, E., Cambioni, S., Hoover, C.G., Jardine, K., Jawin, E., Lunning, N., Mo-laro, J.L., Pajola, M., Righter, K., Ramesh, K.T., Tusberti, F., Walsh, K.J., Wolner, C.W.V., Del-laGiustina, D.N., Connolly, H.C., Lauretta, D.S., 2026. Physical analysis of bennu samples reveals re-golith production by collisional disruption on near-earth asteroids. The Planetary Science Journal 7, 87. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ ae4fad , doi: 10.3847/psj/ae4fad .Belyakov, M., Brown, M.E., 2025. Saturnian Irreg-ular Satellites as a Probe of Kuiper Belt Surface Evolution. The Planetary Science Journal 6, 97. doi: 10.3847/PSJ/adc55d , arXiv:2503.20046 .Benner, M.C., Zega, T.J., Prince, B.S., Wilbur, Z.E., Connolly, H.C., Lauretta, D.S., 2026. A window into the early stages of aqueous alteration from macki-nawite in samples of asteroid Bennu. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta 417, 296–307. doi: 10.1016/j. gca.2026.01.056 .Berger, E.L., Zega, T.J., Keller, L.P., Lauretta, D.S., 2011. Evidence for aqueous activity on comet 81P /Wild 2 from sulfide mineral assemblages in Star-dust samples and CI chondrites. Geochimica et Cos-mochimica Acta 75, 3501–3513. doi: 10.1016/j. gca.2011.03.026 .Bird, R.B., Stewart, W.E., Lightfoot, E.N., 2007. Trans-port Phenomena. 2nd ed. ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York. Bischo ff , D., Gundlach, B., Neuhaus, M., Blum, J., 2018. Experiments on cometary activity: ejection of dust aggregates from a sublimating water-ice surface. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 483, 1202–1210. URL: 

https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/sty3182 ,doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty3182 . _eprint: https: // academic.oup.com /mnras /article-pdf /483 /1/1202 /27070253 /sty3182.pdf. Bonales, L.J., Rodriguez, A.C., Sanz, P.D., 2017. Ther-mal conductivity of ice prepared under di ff erent con-ditions. International Journal of Food Properties 20, 610–619. Bosman, A.D., Tielens, A.G.G.M., van Dishoeck, E.F., 2018. Effi ciency of radial transport of ices in protoplanetary disks probed with infrared observa-tions: the case of co2. Astronomy &; Astro-physics 611, A80. URL: http://dx.doi.org/ 

20 10.1051/0004-6361/201732056 , doi: 10.1051/ 0004-6361/201732056 .Boss, A.P., Durisen, R.H., 2005. Chondrule-forming shock fronts in the solar nebula: A possible unified scenario for planet and chondrite formation. The As-trophysical Journal 621, L137. URL: https://doi. org/10.1086/429160 , doi: 10.1086/429160 .Bouziani, N., Jewitt, D., 2022. Cometary Activ-ity beyond the Planets. The Astrophysical Jour-nal 924, 37. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac323b ,

arXiv:2111.00661 .Brearley, A.J., Jones, R.H., 1998. Chondritic mete-orites, in: Papike, J.J. (Ed.), Planetary Materials. Mineralogical Society of America, Washington, DC. volume 36 of Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochem-istry . chapter 3, pp. 3–001 – 3–398. Britt, D.T., Yeomans, D., Housen, K., Consolmagno, G., 2002. Asteroid Density, Porosity, and Structure, in: Bottke, Jr., W.F., Cellino, A., Paolicchi, P., Binzel, R.P. (Eds.), Asteroids III. University of Arizona Press (Tuscon, Arizona). The University of Arizona Space Science Series, pp. 485–500. Brown, M.E., Trumbo, S.K., Belyakov, M., Davis, M.R., Pandya, A., 2025. A JWST Study of CO 2

on the Satellites of Saturn. The Planetary Sci-ence Journal 6, 180. doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ade807 ,

arXiv:2506.19921 .Cashion, M., Johnson, B., Deienno, R., Kretke, K., Walsh, K., Krot, A., 2025. Chondrule formation indicates protracted growth of gi-ant planet cores. Icarus 429, 116400. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103524004603 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2024.116400 .Chapman, S., Cowling, T.G., 1990. The mathematical theory of non-uniform gases. 3rd. edition ed., Cam-bridge University Press. Ciesla, F., Lauretta, D., Cohen, B., Hood, L., 2003. A nebular origin for chondritic fine-grained phyl-losilicates. Science 299, 549–552. doi: 10.1126/ science.1079427 .Ciesla, F.J., Hood, L.L., 2002. The Nebular Shock Wave Model for Chondrule Formation: Shock Processing in a Particle-Gas Suspension. Icarus 158, 281–293. doi: 10.1006/icar.2002.6895 .Cimerman, N.P., Rafikov, R.R., 2021. Planet-driven density waves in protoplanetary discs: Numerical verification of non-linear evolution theory. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 508, 2329–2349. URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/ mnras/stab2652 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2652 .Clauser, C., Huenges, E., 1995. Rock Physics and Phase Relations. A Handbook of Physical Constants. vol-ume 3. pp. 105–126. Costa, G.C., Jacobson, N.S., Fegley Jr., B., 2017. Vaporization and thermodynamics of forsterite-rich olivine and some implica-tions for silicate atmospheres of hot rocky exoplanets. Icarus 289, 42–55. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103516301798 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2017.02.006 .Cryan, S., Brunetto, R., Guilbert-Lepoutre, A., Pinilla-Alonso, N., Hénault, E., Holler, B.J., Pendleton, Y., Cruikshank, D., Stansberry, J., Emery, J.P., McClure, L.T., Licandro, J., Lorenzi, V., Müller, T.G., Peixinho, N., Harvison, B., Schambeau, C., Bannister, M.T., de Souza-Feliciano, A.C., de Prá, M.N., 2025. Nitrogen-bearing Species on Trans-Neptunian Objects Revealed by JWST /DiSCo-TNOs. The Astrophysical Journal 993, 188. doi: 10.3847/ 1538-4357/ae060d .Cyr, K.E., Sears, W.D., Lunine, J.I., 1998. Distribution and evolution of water ice in the solar nebula: Impli-cations for solar system body formation. Icarus 135, 537–548. De Prá, M.N., Hénault, E., Pinilla-Alonso, N., Holler, B.J., Brunetto, R., Stansberry, J.A., de Souza Fe-liciano, A.C., Carvano, J.M., Harvison, B., Lican-dro, J., Müller, T.G., Peixinho, N., Lorenzi, V., Guilbert-Lepoutre, A., Bannister, M.T., Pendleton, Y.J., Cruikshank, D.P., Schambeau, C.A., McClure, L., Emery, J.P., 2025. Widespread CO 2 and CO ices in the trans-Neptunian population revealed by JWST /DiSCo-TNOs. Nature Astronomy 9, 252–261. doi: 10.1038/s41550-024-02276-x .Desch, S.J., 2007. Mass distribution and planet for-mation in the solar nebula. The Astrophysical Jour-nal 671, 878. URL: https://doi.org/10.1086/ 522825 , doi: 10.1086/522825 .Desch, S.J., Connolly, H. C., J., 2002. A model of the thermal processing of particles in solar nebula 21 shocks: Application to the cooling rates of chon-drules. Meteoritics and Planetary Science 37, 183– 207. doi: 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2002.tb01104. x.Dong, R., Zhu, Z., Rafikov, R.R., Stone, J.M., 2015. Observational Signatures of Planets in Protoplane-tary Disks: Spiral Arms Observed in Scattered Light Imaging Can be Induced by Planets. The Astro-physical Journal Letters 809, L5. doi: 10.1088/ 2041-8205/809/1/L5 , arXiv:1507.03596 .Du, F., Bergin, E.A., 2014. Water Vapor Distribu-tion in Protoplanetary Disks. Astrophysical Jour-nal 792, 2. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/2 ,

arXiv:1408.2026 .Fanale, F.P., Salvail, J.R., 1984. An idealized short-period comet model: Surface insolation, H 2O flux, dust flux, and mantle evolution. Icarus 60, 476–511. doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(84)90157-X .Fellows, C.M., Brown, T.C., Cooper, A., Parigi, M., 2020. Evolution of mobile phases in cometary in-teriors. Publications of the Astronomical Society of Australia 37, e006. doi: 10.1017/pasa.2019.46 .Fray, N., Schmitt, B., 2009. Sublimation of ices of as-trophysical interest: A bibliographic review. Plan-etary and Space Science 57, 2053–2080. doi: 10. 1016/j.pss.2009.09.011 .Fujii, N., Miyamoto, M., 1983. Constraints on the heat-ing and cooling processes of chondrule formation, in: King, E.A. (Ed.), Chondrules and their Origins, pp. 53–60. Fulle, M., Della Corte, V., Rotundi, A., Rietmeijer, F.J.M., Green, S.F., Weissman, P., Accolla, M., Colangeli, L., Ferrari, M., Ivanovski, S., Lopez-Moreno, J.J., Epifani, E.M., Morales, R., Ortiz, J.L., Palomba, E., Palumbo, P., Rodriguez, J., Sordini, R., Zakharov, V., 2016. Comet 67P /Churyumov-Gerasimenko preserved the pebbles that formed plan-etesimals. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronom-ical Society 462, S132–S137. doi: 10.1093/mnras/ stw2299 .Garvie, L.A.J., Trif, L., Cotto-Figueroa, D., E.Asphaug, Hoover, C.G., 2024. High surface area and intercon-nected nanoporosity of clay-rich astromaterials. Sci-entific Reports 14, 10358. Gombosi, T.I., Nagy, A.F., Cravens, T.E., 1986. Dust and neutral gas modeling of the inner atmospheres of comets. Reviews of Geophysics 24, 667–700. doi: 10.1029/RG024i003p00667 .Gonzalez, J.F., Michoulier, S., 2026. The CO snow line favours strong clumping by the streaming in-stability in protoplanetary discs with porous grains. Astronomy & Physics 706, L14. doi: 10.1051/ 0004-6361/202557914 , arXiv:2601.19985 .González Díaz, C., Carrascosa, H., Muñoz Caro, G.M., Satorre, M.Á., Chen, Y.J., 2022. Density and infrared band strength of interstellar carbon monoxide (CO) ice analogues. Monthly Notices of the Royal As-tronomical Society 517, 5744–5755. doi: 10.1093/ mnras/stac3122 , arXiv:2210.15768 .Guerra-Alvarado, O.M., Carrasco-González, C., Macías, E., van der Marel, N., Houge, A., Maud, L.T., Pinilla, P., Villenave, M., Asaki, Y., Humphreys, E., 2024. Into the thick of it: ALMA 0.45 mm observations of HL Tau at aresolution of 2 au. Astronomy & Physics 686, A298. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202349046 ,

arXiv:2404.04164 .Gundlach, B., Ratte, J., Blum, J., Oesert, J., Gorb, S.N., 2018. Sintering and sublimation of micrometre-sized water-ice particles: the formation of surface crusts on icy Solar System bodies. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 479, 5272–5287. doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty1839 .Hayashi, C., 1981. Structure of the Solar Nebula, Growth and Decay of Magnetic Fields and E ff ects of Magnetic and Turbulent Viscosities on the Neb-ula. Progress of Theoretical Physics Supplement 70, 35–53. doi: 10.1143/PTPS.70.35 .Holyst, R., Litniewski, M., Jakubczyk, D., 2015. Amolecular dynamics test of the Hertz-Knudsen equa-tion for evaporating liquids. Soft Matter 11, 7201– 7206. doi: 10.1039/C5SM01508A .Iida, A., Nakamoto, T., Susa, H., Nakagawa, Y., 2001. A shock heating model for chondrule formation in a protoplanetary disk. Icarus 153, 430–450. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103501966825 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1006/icar.2001.6682 .Jacquet, E., Thompson, C., 2014. Chondrule De-struction in Nebular Shocks. Astrophysical Jour-nal 797, 30. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/797/1/30 ,

arXiv:1410.6015 .22 Kataoka, A., Tanaka, H., Okuzumi, S., Wada, K., 2013. Flu ff y dust forms icy planetesimals by static compression. Astronomy & Astrophysics 557, L4. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322151 ,

arXiv:1307.7984 .Kimura, H., Hirai, T., Okamoto, T., Nakamura, A.M., Kokubo, E., Yoshida, Y., Yoshida, F., Hong, P.K., Wada, K., Senshu, H., Arai, T., Arakawa, S., Kadono, T., Kobayashi, M., Ishibashi, K., Akitaya, H., Ya-mada, M., Okudaira, O., Matsui, T., 2025. Ten-sile Strength of Dust, Pebbles, and Planetesimals: A Simple Mathematical Formula from Aggregates to Monoliths Based on an Extension of an Elastic The-ory for Particle Assemblies to Molecular Networks. The Astrophysical Journal 993, 211. doi: 10.3847/ 1538-4357/ae0718 .Kimura, H., Wada, K., Yoshida, F., Hong, P.K., Senshu, H., Arai, T., Hirai, T., Kobayashi, M., Ishibashi, K., Yamada, M., 2020. The tensile strength of dust aggre-gates consisting of small elastic grains: constraints on the size of condensates in protoplanetary discs. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soci-ety 496, 1667–1682. URL: http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1093/mnras/staa1641 , doi: 10.1093/mnras/ staa1641 .Kossacki, K., Leliwa-Kopystynski, J., Witek, P., Jasiak, A., Dubiel, A., 2017. Sublimation of cometary ices in the presence of organic volatiles. Icarus 294, 227– 233. Kossacki, K., Markiewicz, W., Skorov, Y., Koemle, N., 1999. Sublimation coe ffi cient of water ice under sim-ulated cometary-like conditions. Planet. Space Sc. 47, 1521–1530. Kossacki, K.J., 2021. Sublimation of porous granular ice in vacuum. Icarus 368, 114613. Kossacki, K.J., Czechowski, L., 2018. Comet 67p /Churyumov-Gerasimenko, possible origin of the depression Hatmehit. Icarus 305, 1–14. doi: 10. 1016/j.icarus.2017.12.027 .Kossacki, K.J., Leliwa-Kopystynski, J., 2014. Temper-ature dependence of the sublimation rate of water ice: Influence of impurities. Icarus 233, 101–105. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103514000566 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2014.01.025 .Kossacki, K.J., Spohn, T., Hagermann, A., Kauf-mann, E., Kührt, E., 2015. Comet 67P /Churyumov-Gerasimenko: Hardening of the sub-surface layer. Icarus 260, 464–474. doi: 10.1016/j.icarus. 2015.07.024 .Krijt, S., Schwarz, K.R., Bergin, E.A., Ciesla, F.J., 2018. Transport of CO in Protoplanetary Disks: Con-sequences of Pebble Formation, Settling, and Radial Drift. Astrophysical Journal 864, 78. doi: 10.3847/ 1538-4357/aad69b , arXiv:1808.01840 .Kulikovskii, A.G., 2002. Evaporation and Condensation Fronts in Porous Media. Fluid Dynamics 37, 740– 746. doi: 10.1023/A:1021372403318 .Lei, T., Luo, K.H., Hernández Pérez, F.E., Wang, G., Yang, J., Restrepo Cano, J., Im, H.G., 2024. Pore-scale study of CO2 desublimation and sublimation in a packed bed during cryogenic carbon capture. Jour-nal of Fluid Mechanics 990, A6. doi: 10.1017/jfm. 2024.351 .Leliwa-Kopysty´ nski, J., Satorre, M.A., Santonja, C., 2013. Experimental studies of sublimation of highly volatile ices in relevance to the ices of the solar sys-tem. Acta Geophysica 61, 1304–1321. doi: 10.2478/ s11600-013-0114-4 .Ligterink, N.F.W., Kipfer, K.A., Gavino, S., 2024. Mind the trap. Non-negligible e ff ect of volatile trapping in ice on C /O ratios in protoplanetary disks and exo-planetary atmospheres. Astronomy & Astrophysics 687, A224. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450405 ,

arXiv:2406.16029 .Lorek, S., Lacerda, P., Blum, J., 2018. Local growth of dust- and ice-mixed aggregates as cometary build-ing blocks in the solar nebula. Astronomy & As-trophysics 611, A18. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/ 201630175 .Mann, C.R., Boley, A.C., Morris, M.A., 2016. Plan-etary Embryo Bow Shocks as a Mechanism for Chondrule Formation. The Astrophyical Journal 818, 103. doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/2/103 ,

arXiv:1605.04980 .Markwardt, L., Wen Lin, H., Holler, B.J., Gerdes, D.W., Adams, F.C., Malhotra, R., Napier, K.J., 2025. From Colors to Spectra and Back Again: First Near-IR Spectroscopic Survey of Neptunian Trojans. The Planetary Science Journal 6, 154. doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ addecd , arXiv:2310.03998 .23 Matsumoto, Y., Arakawa, S., 2023. Igneous Rim Accretion on Chondrules in Low-velocity Shock Waves. Astrophysical Journal 948, 73. doi: 10.3847/ 1538-4357/acc57c , arXiv:2303.10450 .Michoulier, S., Gonzalez, J.F., Price, D.J., 2024. Com-paction during fragmentation and bouncing produces realistic dust grain porosities in protoplanetary discs. Astronomy & Physics 688, A31. doi: 10.1051/ 0004-6361/202449719 , arXiv:2406.15622 .Miles, R., Faillace, G.A., 2012. On liquid phases in cometary nuclei. Icarus 219, 567–595. doi: 10.1016/ j.icarus.2012.03.036 .Miura, H., Nakamoto, T., 2005. A shock-wave heating model for chondrule formation II. Minimum size of chondrule precursors. Icarus 175, 289–304. doi: 10. 1016/j.icarus.2004.11.011 .Morris, M.A., Boley, A.C., 2018. Formation of chon-drules by shock waves, in: Russell, S.S., Connolly Jr., H.C., Krot, A.N. (Eds.), Chondrules: Records of Protoplanetary Disk Processes. Cambridge Univer-sity Press. Cambridge Planetary Science, p. 375–399. Nakamura-Messenger, K., Clemett, S.J., Messenger, S., Keller, L.P., 2011. Experimental aqueous alteration of cometary dust. Meteoritics & Planetary Science 46, 843–856. doi: 10.1111/j.1945-5100.2011. 01197.x .Öberg, K.I., van Broekhuizen, F., Fraser, H.J., Biss-chop, S.E., van Dishoeck, E.F., Schlemmer, S., 2005. Competition between CO and N 2 Desorption from In-terstellar Ices. The Astrophysical Journal Letters 621, L33–L36. doi: 10.1086/428901 .Ogliore, R.C., 2023. Comet 81P /Wild 2: A record of the Solar System’s wild youth. Chemie der Erde / Geo-chemistry 83, 126046. doi: 10.1016/j.chemer. 2023.126046 , arXiv:2311.18119 .Ormel, C.W., Cuzzi, J.N., Tielens, A.G.G.M., 2008. Co-Accretion of Chondrules and Dust in the Solar Nebula. The Astrophyical Journal 679, 1588–1610. doi: 10.1086/587836 , arXiv:0802.4048 .O’Rourke, L., Heinisch, P., Blum, J., Fornasier, S., Fi-lacchione, G., Van Hoang, H., Ciarniello, M., Raponi, A., Gundlach, B., Blasco, R.A., Grieger, B., Glass-meier, K.H., Küppers, M., Rotundi, A., Groussin, O., Bockelée-Morvan, D., Auster, H.U., Oklay, N., Paar, G., Perucha, M.d.P.C., Kovacs, G., Jorda, L., Vin-cent, J.B., Capaccioni, F., Biver, N., Parker, J.W., Tubiana, C., Sierks, H., 2020. The Philae lander reveals low-strength primitive ice inside cometary boulders. Nature 586, 697–701. doi: 10.1038/ s41586-020-2834-3 .Palumbo, M.E., 1997. Infrared Spectra and Nature of the Principal CO Trapping Sites in Amorphous and Crystalline H2O Ice. Journal of Physical Chemistry A 101, 4298–4301. doi: 10.1021/jp962462y .Pätzold, M., Andert, T.P., Hahn, M., Barriot, J.P., As-mar, S.W., Häusler, B., Bird, M.K., Tellmann, S., Os-chlisniok, J., Peter, K., 2019. The Nucleus of comet 67P /Churyumov-Gerasimenko - Part I: The global view - nucleus mass, mass-loss, porosity, and impli-cations. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomi-cal Society 483, 2337–2346. doi: 10.1093/mnras/ sty3171 .Podolak, M., Mayer, L., Quinn, T., 2011. Evolu-tion of Coated Grains in Spiral Shocks of Self-gravitating Protoplanetary Disks. Astrophysical Jour-nal 734, 56. doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/734/1/56 ,

arXiv:1012.5269 .Powell, D., Gao, P., Murray-Clay, R., Zhang, X., 2022. Depletion of gaseous CO in protoplane-tary disks by surface-energy-regulated ice formation. Nature Astronomy 6, 1147–1155. doi: 10.1038/ s41550-022-01741-9 , arXiv:2208.13806 .Prialnik, D., Podolak, M., 1995. Radioactive heating of porous comet nuclei. Icarus 117, 420–430. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103585711669 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1006/icar.1995.1166 .Qi, C., Wilner, D.J., 2024. Evidence for a Sharp CO Snow Line Transition in a Protoplanetary Disk and Implications for Millimeter-wave Obser-vations of CO Isotopologues. Astrophysical Jour-nal 977, 60. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad8d55 ,

arXiv:2410.23036 .Quillen, A.C., Luniewski, S., Rubinstein, A.E., Couturier, J., Glade, R., Nakajima, M., 2024. Wind erosion and transport on plan-etesimals. Icarus 411, 115948. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S001910352400006X , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2024.115948 .Romanova, T., Stachowiak, P., Je˙ zowski, A., 2014. Dissipation of phonons by subsystem of disordered molecules - Case of thermal conductivity of carbon 24 monoxide crystal. Solid State Communications 197, 6–10. doi: 10.1016/j.ssc.2014.07.020 .Ryan, A.J., Ballouz, R.L., Macke, R.J., Ishizaki, T., Alasli, A., Biele, J., Eckley, S.A., Hoover, C.G., Jar-dine, K., King, A.J., Opeil, C.P., Pajola, M., Tusberti, F., Barnes, J.J., Bates, H.C., Berger, E.L., Bierhaus, E.B., Calva, C., Cambioni, S., Cheng, F., Delbo, M., DellaGiustina, D.N., Dworkin, J.P., Elder, C.M., Emery, J.P., Freemantle, J., Fujita, R., Glavin, D.P., Gonzalez, C., Haenecour, P., Hamilton, V.E., Hanna, R.D., Hanton, L.T.J., Harrington, R., Hildebrand, A.R., Hill, D.H., Ishimaru, K., Jawin, E.R., Kon-togiannis, M.K., Lunning, N.G., McCoy, T.J., Mo-laro, J.L., Montoya, M., Nagano, H., O’Neal, E.W., Plummer, J., Righter, K., Sakatani, N., Sánchez, P., Schofield, P.F., Siegler, M.A., Tanaka, S., Zega, T.J., Wolner, C.W.V., Connolly, Jr., H.C., Lauretta, D.S., 2026. Low thermal inertia of carbonaceous asteroid Bennu driven by cracks observed in returned sam-ples. Nature Communications 17, 2443. doi: 10. 1038/s41467-026-68505-1 .Saiduzzaman, M., Konstantinov, V.A., Andersson, O., 2025. Thermal conductivity of solid carbon dioxide. International Journal of Thermophysics 46. URL: https://api.semanticscholar.org/ CorpusID:277201876 .Sakurai, T., Ishizaki, T., Nakamura, A.M., 2025. Experimental study on thermal and mechanical properties of sintered glass materials: Implication for physical properties of primordial porous materials in the solar system. Icarus 441, 116729. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103525002775 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2025.116729 .Sanders, I.S., Scott, E.R.D., 2012. The ori-gin of chondrules and chondrites: Debris from low-velocity impacts between molten planetesi-mals? Meteoritics & Planetary Science 47, 2170– 2192. URL: https://onlinelibrary.wiley. com/doi/abs/10.1111/maps.12002 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1111/maps.12002 .Scarpa, F., Milano, G., 2002. The role of adsorption and phase change phenomena in the thermophysical char-acterization of moist porous materials. International Journal of Thermophysics 23, 1033–1046. Schneider, A.D., Bitsch, B., 2021. How drifting and evaporating pebbles shape giant planets. II. Volatiles and refractories in atmospheres. Astronomy & As-trophysics 654, A72. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/ 202141096 , arXiv:2109.03589 .Schweighart, M., Macher, W., Kargl, G., Gundlach, B., Capelo, H.L., 2021. Viscous and Knudsen gas flow through dry porous cometary analogue material. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 504, 5513–5527. doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab934 .Sharkey, B.N.L., Rivkin, A.S., Cartwright, R.J., Holler, B.J., Emery, J.P., Thomas, C., 2025. JWST Reveals Varied Origins between Jupiter’s Irregular Satellites. The Planetary Science Journal 6, 242. doi: 10.3847/ PSJ/ae04dd .Sheldon, R.B., Hoover, R.B., 2005. Evidence for liquid water on comets, in: Hoover, R., Levin, G., Rozanov, A., Randall, G. (Eds.), Astrobiology and Planetary Missions, pp. 127–145. Shi, Y., Long, F., Macías, E., Herczeg, G.J., Pinilla, P., Andrews, S.M., Wilner, D.J., Jiang, H., Dong, R., Teague, R., Pascucci, I., Toci, C., Aikawa, Y., Har-sono, D., Liu, Y., 2026. Probing Dust in the MWC 480 Disk from Millimeter to Centimeter Wave-lengths. The Astrophysical Journal 1001, 27. doi: 10. 3847/1538-4357/ae4973 , arXiv:2602.19941 .Simon, A., Öberg, K.I., Rajappan, M., Maksiutenko, P., 2019. Entrapment of co in co2 ice. The As-trophysical Journal 883, 21. URL: https://doi. org/10.3847/1538-4357/ab32e5 , doi: 10.3847/ 1538-4357/ab32e5 .Sirono, S., Furuta, G., 2024. Size of icy grains after a heating event in a protoplan-etary disk. Icarus 417, 116123. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103524001830 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2024.116123 .Song, M.Y., Cho, H., Karwasz, G.P., Kokoouline, V., Tennyson, J., 2024. Cross Sections for Electron Col-lisions with the CO 2 Molecule and CO2 + Molecu-lar Ion. Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 53, 033102. doi: 10.1063/5.0215796 .Spohn, T., Knollenberg, J., Ball, A.J., Banaszkiewicz, M., Benkho ff , J., Grott, M., Grygorczuk, J., Hüttig, C., Hagermann, A., Kargl, G., Kaufmann, E., Kömle, N., Kührt, E., Kossacki, K.J., Marczewski, W., Peli-van, I., Schrödter, R., Seiferlin, K., 2015. Thermal 25 and mechanical properties of the near-surface lay-ers of comet 67P /Churyumov-Gerasimenko. Science 349, 2.464. doi: 10.1126/science.aab0464 .Stammler, S.M., Dullemond, C.P., 2014. Acritical analysis of shock models for chon-drule formation. Icarus 242, 1–10. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0019103514004096 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2014.07.024 .Stewart, S.T., Ahrens, T.J., 2000. Shock wave propa-gation in porous ice, in: Shock Compression of Con-densed Matter - 1999, AIP. pp. 1243–1246. doi: 10. 1063/1.1303686 .Stewart, S.T., Lock, S.J., Carter, P.J., Davies, E.J., Petaev, M.I., Jacobsen, S.B., 2025. Planetesimal im-pact vapor plumes and nebular shocks form chon-dritic mixtures. URL: https://arxiv.org/abs/ 2503.05636 , arXiv:2503.05636 .Sturm, J.A., McClure, M.K., Beck, T.L., Harsono, D., Bergner, J.B., Dartois, E., Boogert, A.C.A., Chiar, J.E., Cordiner, M.A., Drozdovskaya, M.N., Iop-polo, S., Law, C.J., Linnartz, H., Lis, D.C., Mel-nick, G.J., McGuire, B.A., Noble, J.A., Öberg, K.I., Palumbo, M.E., Pendleton, Y.J., Perotti, G., Pon-toppidan, K.M., Qasim, D., Rocha, W.R.M., Ter-ada, H., Urso, R.G., van Dishoeck, E.F., 2023a. A JWST inventory of protoplanetary disk ices. The edge-on protoplanetary disk HH 48 NE, seen with the Ice Age ERS program. Astronomy & Astrophysics 679, A138. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347512 ,

arXiv:2309.07817 .Sturm, J.A., McClure, M.K., Bergner, J.B., Harsono, D., Dartois, E., Drozdovskaya, M.N., Ioppolo, S., Öberg, K.I., Law, C.J., Palumbo, M.E., Pendleton, Y.J., Rocha, W.R.M., Terada, H., Urso, R.G., 2023b. The edge-on protoplanetary disk HH 48 NE. II. Mod-eling ices and silicates. Astronomy & Astrophysics 677, A18. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346053 ,

arXiv:2305.02355 .Tanaka, K.K., Yamamoto, T., Tanaka, H., Miura, H., Nagasawa, M., Nakamoto, T., 2013. Evap-oration of icy planetesimals due to bow shocks. The Astrophyical Journal 764. URL: https:// www.osti.gov/biblio/22167755 , doi: 10.1088/ 0004-637X/764/2/120 .Thomas, P.C., A’Hearn, M.F., Veverka, J., Belton, M.J.S., Kissel, J., Klaasen, K.P., McFadden, L.A., Melosh, H.J., Schultz, P.H., Besse, S., Carcich, B.T., Farnham, T.L., Groussin, O., Hermalyn, B., Li, J.Y., Lindler, D.J., Lisse, C.M., Meech, K., Richardson, J.E., 2013. Shape, density, and geology of the nu-cleus of Comet 103P /Hartley 2. Icarus 222, 550–558. doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2012.05.034 .Visser, R., van Dishoeck, E.F., Doty, S.D., Dullemond, C.P., 2009. The chemical history of molecules in circumstellar disks. I. Ices. Astronomy & Astro-physics 495, 881–897. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/ 200810846 , arXiv:0901.1313 .Vorhauer-Huget, N., Mannes, D., Hilmer, M., Gru-ber, S., Strobl, M., Tsotsas, E., Foerst, P., 2020. Freeze-Drying with Structured Sublimation Fronts-Visualization with Neutron Imaging. Processes 8, 1091. Wallis, M.K., 1980. Radiogenic melting of primordial comet interiors. Nature 284, 431–433. doi: 10.1038/ 284431a0 .Warning, A.D., Arquiza, J., Datta, A.K., 2015. A multiphase porous medium transport model with distributed sublimation front to simu-late vacuum freeze drying. Food and Bio-products Processing 94, 637–648. URL: 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/ article/pii/S0960308514000960 , doi: https: //doi.org/10.1016/j.fbp.2014.08.011 .Welty, J., Wicks, C.E., Rorrer, G.L., 2008. Fun-damentals Of Momentum, Heat, And Mass Trans-fer, 5th Edition. John Wiley and sons, Hobo-ken. URL: https://books.google.com/books? id=ty8XTwEACAAJ .Whipple, F.L., 1950. A comet model. I. The accelera-tion of Comet Encke. The Astrophyical Journal 111, 375–394. doi: 10.1086/145272 .Williams, J., Krijt, S., Bitsch, B., Houge, A., Bergner, J., 2025. Locked in ice: how pebble drift and volatile entrapment can significantly impact carbon and oxygen ratios in evolving protoplanetary discs. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 544, 3562–3578. doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1839 ,

arXiv:2510.18587 .Wong, I., Brown, M.E., Emery, J.P., Binzel, R.P., Grundy, W.M., Marchi, S., Martin, A.C., Noll, K.S., Sunshine, J.M., 2024. JWST Near-infrared Spec-troscopy of the Lucy Jupiter Trojan Flyby Targets: Evidence for OH Absorption, Aliphatic Organics, 26 and CO 2. The Planetary Science Journal 5, 87. doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ad2fc3 , arXiv:2311.11531 .Wong, I., Holler, B.J., Protopapa, S., Guilbert-Lepoutre, A., Grundy, W.M., Stansberry, J.A., Ham-mel, H.B., Milam, S.N., Brunetto, R., Emery, J.P., Fernández-Valenzuela, E., Pinilla-Alonso, N., 2025. JWST /NIRSpec Observations of Salacia-Actaea and Máni: Exploring Population-level Trends among Water-ice-rich Kuiper Belt Objects. The Planetary Science Journal 6, 281. doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ae1d63 ,

arXiv:2508.17101 .Yelle, R.V., Soderblom, L.A., Jokipii, J.R., 2004. For-mation of jets in Comet 19P /Borrelly by subsur-face geysers. Icarus 167, 30–36. doi: 10.1016/j. icarus.2003.08.020 .Yu, Y., Hewins, R.H., Eiben, B.A., 1995. Cooling Rates of Chondrules. Meteoritics 30, 604. Zhang, S., Zhu, Z., Ueda, T., Kataoka, A., Sierra, A., Carrasco-González, C., Macías, E., 2023. Porous Dust Particles in Protoplanetary Disks: Applica-tion to the HL Tau Disk. The Astrophysical Jour-nal 953, 96. doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acdb4e ,

arXiv:2306.00158 .Ziampras, A., Ataiee, S., Kley, W., Dullemond, C.P., Baruteau, C., 2020. The impact of planet wakes on the location and shape of the water ice line in a protoplanetary disk. Astronomy and Physics 633, A29. doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201936495 ,

arXiv:1910.08560 .Zivithal, S., Macher, W., Kargl, G., Lammer, H., 2025. Sublimation front and sinter layer formation on cometary surfaces: modelling the desiccation pro-cess from mixtures of ice and refractory materials. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society 541, 2651–2673. doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1091 .

Appendix A. Numerical Model 

Our system consists of two coupled di ff usion (or heat) equations, one for energy and evolving tempera-ture, and one for gas transport and evolving gas density. The di ff usion coe ffi cients are not constant as they are dependent both on depth and time. In addition, there are source terms to take into account ice sublimation or deposition. We use a 1-dimensional model of a porous solid, with physical quantities depending on time, t, and depth be-low surface, x. The surface is set at x = 0, with increas-ing values of x indicating increasing depths below the surface. In each simulation we track molecular hydrogen along with a single volatile species gas species and its associated ice. We use 1-dimensional arrays for temper-ature T , porosity ϕ, the bulk number density of molec-ular hydrogen ng,0 and the volatile ng,i (i > 0), and the number density of the associated ice form ns,i. These arrays give these physical quantities as a function of depth. The body is assumed to be primarily composed of forsterite, a porous rocky and non-volatile solid with a density and thermal conductivity listed in Table 1. We simplify the energy transport equation (Equation 19), only taking into account energy from adsorption of a single volatile gas species: (1 − ϕ)Cuni 

∂T

∂t = ∂∂x kT,e ff 

∂T

∂x

!

− Esub ˙nsub ,i. (A.1) The universal specific heat Cuni is a fixed value and given in Equation 11. The bulk thermal conductivity 

kT,eff is computed with Equation 10 and is function of depth and time. We calculate the transport of a gas species via Knud-sen di ff usion (repeating Equation 5), 

∂ng,i

∂t = ∂∂x DKn ,i

∂ng,i

∂x

!

+ ˙nsub ,i. (A.2) When calculating parameters that rely on the volume which is physically occupied (within the pores), we scale by the local porosity, e.g, partial pressure Pi =

(ng,i/ϕ ) kBT . The di ff usion coe ffi cient is calculated us-ing Equation 6 and is sensitive to depth and time. The ice sublimation or deposition rate, giving ˙ nsub ,i, is de-scribed by Equation 22 and is also a function of depth and time. Equations A.1 & A.2 both contain a first order time derivative and a second order spatial derivative, so they are both similar to the generic heat equation. We use an equally spaced grid in depth x with grid spacing ∆x. The second order spatial partial derivatives are computed with a central di ff erence approximation with truncation error ( ∆x)2

∂2u

∂x2 ≈ u j+1 − 2u j + u j−1

(∆x)2 , (A.3) where subscripts refer to spatial grid positions. For a heat equation with di ff usion coe ffi cient D

∂u

∂t = D ∂2u

∂x2 . (A.4) 27 a forward time central-space (FTCS) scheme for numer-ical integration is 

un+1 

> j

= unj + D ∆t

∆x2

unj+1 − 2unj + unj−1

 (A.5) where superscripts referring to the time-step. The di-mensionless parameter 

α = D ∆t

∆x2 (A.6) serves as a Courant number, and the numerical scheme is stable, according to von Neumann stability analysis, for a time-step that is su ffi cient small that 

α < 12 . (A.7) For both heat and gas transport equations, we use a modified version of the forward time central-space (FTCS) scheme for approximating the solution to the heat equation. 

Appendix A.1. Energy Equation 

We approximate the heat transport equation (Equa-tion A.1) with (1 − ϕnj )Cuni 

T n+1 

> j

− T nj

∆t = kT,eff 

T nj+1 − 2T nj + T nj−1

(∆x)2

+ Esub ,i ˙nnj,sub ,i (A.8) where subscripts refer to spatial grid positions and su-perscripts refer to the time-step. This gives 

T n+1 

> j

= T nj + ∆t

(1 − ϕni )Cuni 



kT,eff 

T nj+1 − 2T nj + T nj−1

(∆x)2

+ Esub ,i ˙nnj,sub ,i



. (A.9) The energy transport equation has a heat di ff usivity 

Dheat = kT,eff 

(1 − ϕ)Cuni 

. (A.10) The e ff ective Courant number for the numerical scheme of Equation A.9 

αu ≡ ∆t

(∆x)2 Dheat = ∆t

(∆x)2

kT,eff 

(1 − ϕ)Cuni 

, (A.11) where the subscript ‘ u’ denotes that this number is based on the energy transport equation. 

Appendix A.2. Mass Transport Equation 

In the gas transport equation (Equation A.2), we note that the Knudsen di ff usion coe ffi cient is dependent on depth x through the thermal velocity, Vth ,i. Using Equa-tion 6 for the di ff usion coe ffi cient and Equation 7 for the thermal velocity, the gas transport equation becomes 

∂ng,i

∂t = dp

3

r 8kB

πmi

∂∂x

√T ∂ng,i

∂x

!

+ ˙nsub ,i, (A.12) where ˙ nsub ,i is the sublimation rate of gas species ‘ i’. We calculate a dimensionless number serving the role of a Courant number for the gas transport equation (Equa-tion A.15 but only taking into account di ff usion), 

αm ≡ dp

3

r 8kBT

πmi

∆t

(∆x)2 . (A.13) We split the update for the gas number density into two steps. We first calculate the gas transport neglecting the adsorption rate term, ˙ nsub ,i. We then add on a term to take into account sublimation or deposition. Taking into account di ff usion alone and neglecting the sublimation source term, the mass transport equa-tion is approximated by the finite di ff erence equation 

nag,i − nng,i

∆t = dp

3

r 8kB

πmi

×

"  q 

T nj+1 −

q

T nj+1



(nnj+1,g,i − nnj−1,g,i)2( ∆x)2 +

q

T nj



nnj+1,g,i + nnj−1,g,i − 2nnj,g,i

(∆x)2

#

. (A.14) The superscript a denotes the fact that we are carrying out the first part of the update. This gives the number density 

naj,g,i = nnj,g,i + dp

3

r 8kB

πmi

∆t

(∆x)2 ×

"  q 

T nj+1 −

q

T nj−1



(nnj+1,g,i − nnj−1,g,i)2( ∆x)2 +

q

T nj



nnj+1,g,i + nnj−1,g,i − 2nnj,g,i

(∆x)2

#

. (A.15) With time-step set by the e ff ective Courant number for the gas transport di ff usion equation, a significant fraction of the available gas can be deposited as ice dur-ing a single time-step if the density of the volatile gas is low. Similarly when the amount of ice is low, a signif-icant fraction of it can be sublimated in a time-step. To 28 reduce sensitivity to the grid spacing and time-step we we analytically solve for the volatile gas number den-sity using the adsorption rate (Equation 22). We update the array containing number density of the volatile gas in two steps, first using Equation A.15. Then afterwards we adjust the number density to take into account subli-mation or deposition as described below. We repeat Equation 22 for the deposition or adsorp-tion rate, assuming an equality rather than the approxi-mate relation previously written, ˙ndep ,i = Vth ,i(ng,i − nv,i) αads ,i

4dp

= −˙nsub,i . (A.16) With 

dn g,i

dt = −˙ndep ,i (A.17) 

= −Vth ,i(ng,i − nv,i) αads ,i

4dp

(A.18) we can find a time dependent solution 

ng,i(t) = nv,i + (ng,i(0) − nv,i) exp − Vth ,i(T )αads ,i

4dp

t

!

(A.19) in the approximation that the thermal velocity and vapor pressure are fixed (ignoring their temperature variations during the time-step). After time ∆tnn+1 

> g,i

= nnv,i + (nag,i − nnv,i) exp − Vth ,i(T n)αads ,i

4dp

∆t

!

.

(A.20) The expression gives the second part of our update for the gas number density array. As the expression only depends on one specific spatial grid point, we have ne-glected the spatial grid index. Here nag,i is the num-ber density we calculated in the first half of the update taking into account di ff usion and that was computed in Equation A.15. 

Appendix A.3. Time-step choice 

We adopt a single time-step ∆t for an entire simula-tion. We compute the e ff ective Courant numbers αm,

αu from equations A.11 and A.13 using the maximum temperature in the nebula during the transient heating event. In practice we find that the Courant number for gas transport, αm, is always smaller than the Courant number for energy transport αu. This is because the heat di ff usivity exceeds the Knudsen di ff usion coe ffi cient, 

Dheat > DKn ,i. (A.21) We set αm = 1/2 and using Equation A.13, we solve for 

∆t. We use a constant time-step marginally smaller than this value to ensure stability for the entire simulation. 

Appendix A.4. Pressure, Porosity, and Solids 

At each time-step, we calculate the partial pressure of each gas species within a pore, the vapor pressure for a volatile at the current temperature, the change in solid volatile material, and the porosity. In calculating the partial pressure and vapor pressure we use Equations 1 and 25, 

Pni =kBT n nng,i

ϕn (A.22) 

Pnv,i =eAv,i−Bv,i/T n

. (A.23) This is computed on each spatial grid position indepen-dently, so we have neglected the j spatial index. The number density associated with the vapor pressure of gas species innv,i = ϕn Pnv,i

kBT n . (A.24) Using Equations A.20 and A.15, the number density of gas species i that was sublimated during the time-step is nn+1 

> g,i

− nag,i. We update the bulk number density of the associated solid species 

nn+1 

> s,i

= nns,i − (nn+1 

> g,i

− nag,i). (A.25) The fractional volume occupied by the solid of species i is ns,i/Vi, where Vi is the volume of a single molecule of species i,

Vi = mi

ρs,i

. (A.26) After computing the solid number density with Equa-tion A.25, we update the porosity using the volume per-centage occupied by solids, 

ϕn+1 = 1 −

X

> i

(Vinn+1 

> s,i

). (A.27) 

Appendix A.5. Initial conditions & Boundary Condi-tions 

All arrays when initialized are independent of depth. The initial pressure, temperature, and number density arrays are set to match the ambient nebular conditions. The porosity as well as ice and rock fraction are initial-ized uniformly, independent of depth, and are variables that can be changed at the start of the simulation. The initial solid number density array is determined by the initial porosity and solid species fraction. The lower boundary condition we set as a Neumann boundary with derivative equal to 0. If index J is the 29 right-most index, the boundary condition for tempera-ture is defined as 

T n+1 

> J

= T n+1 

> J−1

. (A.28) This lower boundary condition applies to all all updated arrays. The surface boundary condition is set up using a ghost boundary cell. The values in this ghost cell are set to the time dependent current nebular conditions. The surface boundary cell is then evaluated the same as any internal cell, using this ghost cell. Implementation of the boundary conditions is the fi-nal set of computations made in a single time-step in the simulation. While the surface boundary condition depends on values from the current timestep, the lower (Neumann) boundary condition requires the interior val-ues to have already been computed for the next timestep. 

Appendix B. Numerical Checks 

We limit the amount of gas sublimated or the amount of ice deposited to ensure the change in gaseous num-ber density does not exceed the available volatile in the solid or let the pressure fall below the vapor pressure. The total number of molecules in a grid cell sublimated during a timestep is limited to be at most the number of molecules in ice present in that same grid cell. Hence, Equation A.25 is modified to ensure that nn+1 

> s,i

can never become negative. We have checked that our integrations are insensitive to simulation time-step duration, for time-steps shorter than that set from the e ff ective Courant number αm. This insensitivity is illustrated in Figure B.13 where we show ice fractions as a function of depth for 2 di ff erent simu-lations that are the same except for their ∆t values. We additionally check that our integrations are in-sensitive to grid size. We plot in Figure B.14 the ice volume fraction at t = 360 s for 5 di ff erent grid spac-ings. By reducing the grid size, we find the deposition front becomes narrower and the ice volume fraction in-creases at the deposition front, which would be expected as volatiles primarily deposit at the earliest location pos-sible, causing greater deposition in a smaller computa-tional region when the grid size is reduced. In Figure B.15 we plot the column density of ice deposited and the depth at which the deposition front begins. We find the initial depth remains unchanged, also seen in Figure B.14, and the column density begins to converge with a grid spacing of ∆ x = 0.001 m or smaller    

> Figure B.13: We plot the ice volume fraction as a function of depth at the end of the simulation for 2 di ff erent simulations. These sim-ulations have the same parameters as Run 2 (with parameters listed in Table 3) except for their time-step, dt , which is shown on the top right. We find that the estimated ice fractions are insensitive to time-step, with the deposition front being identical between both runs.
> Figure B.14: We plot the ice volume fraction as a function of depth and the end of the simulation ( t=360 s) for 5 di ff erent grid spacings. These simulations all have the same parameters as Run 2.

30 Figure B.15: We plot the column density of deposited ices and the depth the deposition front exceeds the initial ice volume fraction for 5 di ff erent runs varying ∆x. We find the column density converges toward a common value, approaching that convergence point with ∆x

= 0.001 m. 

31