Title: Radio emission from close-in exoplanets: Can we extend the radio-magnetic scaling law to the sub-Alfvénic stellar wind regime?

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07704v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 01:20:25 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv ©ESO 2026 July 9, 2026 

# Radio emission from close-in exoplanets: Can we extend the radio-magnetic scaling law to the sub-Alfvénic stellar wind regime? 

Filip Elekes and Aline A. Vidotto 

Leiden Observatory, Leiden University, Einsteinweg 55, NL-2333 CC Leiden e-mail: elekes@strw.leidenuniv.nl 

Received 7 April 2026 / Accepted 6 July 2026 

ABSTRACT 

Context. Observations of exoplanetary radio auroras can directly probe planetary magnetic fields and be used to infer properties of the local magnetic star–planet interaction. However, the search for exoplanetary radio auroras has been ongoing for decades without indisputable detections despite numerous favorable predictions based on extrapolations of the radio-magnetic scaling law (RMSL). 

Aims. The RMSL is based on Solar System planets that lie in the super-Alfvénic solar wind regime, and it is unclear whether the relation holds for close-in exoplanets residing in sub-Alfvénic and strongly magnetized winds. We aim to test whether the relation can be extended to sub-Alfvénic stellar winds. 

Methods. We employed 3D magnetohydrodynamic simulations of the magnetosphere of a Jupiter-like planet at various distances from the Sun to study properties of the expected radio emission, taking the atmospheric photoionization into consideration and using a solar wind model with a nominal and an enhanced magnetic field. 

Results. Our radio predictions match the RMSL in the super-Alfvénic solar wind regime. However, we find that in the sub-Alfvénic solar wind regime, RMSL predictions overestimate the planetary radio output by one order of magnitude. This discrepancy is signifi-cantly higher in the case of a stronger magnetized wind, which is caused by a strong decrease in wind-magnetosphere energy transfer effi ciency. Thus, planetary radio emission may fall below the sensitivity limit of current radio telescopes, which could partially ex-plain the lack of detections. We expect the overestimation by the RMSL to increase even further with more magnetic cool stars. Furthermore, due to atmospheric photoionization and the resulting high ionospheric electron densities, favorable conditions for the generation and escape of electron-cyclotron maser instability (ECMI)-driven radio emission are constrained to larger orbital distances (≳ 0.1 au) and to the planetary nightside in the solar wind case. This further decreases our predicted radio powers by up to one order of magnitude. In more strongly magnetized winds, enhanced open planetary magnetic flux and reconnection-driven outflows cause magnetospheric electron depletion, resulting in improved ECMI conditions and e ff ectively eliminating the mitigating e ff ect of strong photoionization on ECMI emission. Via calibration with the RMSL, we find the combined electron acceleration and ECMI e ffi ciency in the super-Alfvénic solar wind to be ≈ 10 −3. We argue that the e ffi ciency is unlikely to increase up to ≈ 10 −1 in sub-Alfvénic regimes, which would be needed to overcome the predicted discrepancy between RMSL and our predictions. 

Key words. star-planet interactions – magnetohydrodynamics – radio emission – magnetic fields – exoplanets – aurora 

1. Introduction 

Star–planet magnetic interactions (SPMIs) have the potential to release large energy fluxes, with possible far-reaching conse-quences for the evolution of planets, atmospheres, and their mag-netospheres. Strong SPMIs can lead to observable signatures that enable the inference of local conditions at the stars, their winds, or the planets. Compact exoplanetary systems represent an ex-ceptional laboratory for probing such SPMIs due to the high en-ergy densities involved in the stellar outflows (e.g., winds and eruptive phenomena) to which close-in exoplanets are exposed (Vidotto et al. 2015; Elekes et al. 2025). To study and char-acterize such SPMIs, knowledge about stellar wind properties (e.g., plasma density, magnetic field, and velocity) and plane-tary characteristics (e.g., magnetic field and atmosphere prop-erties) are necessary. While stellar winds can be partially con-strained using stellar magnetic field maps (e.g., Vidotto et al. 2009; Evensberget et al. 2026) obtained from spectropolarimet-ric observations and the Zeeman-Doppler imaging method (e.g., Semel 1989; Donati et al. 1997), knowledge about the planetary magnetic fields is still largely unconstrained. Planets represent an obstacle in the ionized stellar wind flow, and the amount of energy involved in such SPMIs is largely determined by the size of the obstacle and its ability to e ff ectively convert the incom-ing energy fluxes. Planetary magnetic fields determine the size of the obstacle (i.e. the magnetosphere) and provide generator mechanisms capable of converting the incoming energy fluxes into other forms of energy (Akasofu 1981; Elekes et al. 2025). From the Solar System planets, we know that part of this energy is released in auroral emissions. Observations of planetary auroral radio emission are particu-larly important as they can be used to directly infer the source re-gion’s magnetic field strength due to the emission frequency be-ing dictated by the local electron gyrofrequency (Hess & Zarka 2011; Kavanagh et al. 2024; Callingham et al. 2024). The gener-ation of such emissions is generally attributed to the electron cy-clotron maser instability (ECMI) mechanism, whose e ffi ciency is sensitive to local plasma conditions (e.g., the electron density and magnetic field strength; Winglee & Dulk 1986; Zarka 1998; Treumann 2006). Planetary auroral radio emissions have been observed from all magnetized planets in the Solar System. For example, Jupiter’s magnetic field was constrained by radio ob-servations long before it was measured in situ by space probes (Franklin & Burke 1958). Consequently, great e ff orts have been 

Article number, page 1 of 16 arXiv:2607.07704v1 [astro-ph.EP] 8 Jul 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv 

made over decades to observe such exoplanetary radio emis-sions, but so far without unambiguous success (e.g., Yantis et al. 1977; Winglee et al. 1986; Bastian et al. 2000; Lazio & Far-rell 2007; Hallinan et al. 2013; Zarka et al. 2015; Murphy et al. 2015; Lynch et al. 2017; Bastian et al. 2018; de Gasperin et al. 2020). The most promising observation was reported recently (τ Boo b; Turner et al. 2021). However, this measurement has not yet been confirmed by follow-up detections (Turner et al. 2023, 2024; Cordun et al. 2025). Naturally, the question arises as to why the search for exo-planetary radio emissions is proving so di ffi cult. There are sev-eral possible reasons: The radio emission is too weak, or the sensitivity of current radio telescopes is too low (Bastian et al. 2000; Vidotto et al. 2015; Lynch et al. 2017; Elekes & Saur 2023; Evensberget et al. 2026). The bandwidth of possible ra-dio emissions is large, while the bandwidth of individual tele-scopes is relatively small. Hence, it is possible that emissions have not been detected due to a mismatch in frequency bands (Bastian et al. 2000). The Earth’s ionosphere is impervious to ra-dio waves with frequencies below 10 MHz (the ionospheric cut-off ; Wilson et al. 2013). A similar situation may exist at the exo-planets since high plasma densities in the magnetosphere caused, for example, by inflated atmospheres or strong stellar X-ray and ultraviolet (XUV) radiation and associated atmospheric escape can hinder auroral radio emission to escape (Weber et al. 2017, 2018; Daley-Yates & Stevens 2018). The ECMI mechanism is also known to operate at reduced e ffi ciency if the local gyro fre-quency is too close to or lower than the local plasma frequency (Treumann 2006). Thus, the primary targets of the search for exo-radio auroras, i.e., close-in giant planets (Grießmeier et al. 2007; Jardine & Collier Cameron 2008), may prove to be worse radio emitters than previously anticipated (Griessmeier 2017). Geometric causes may also be a factor: auroral ECMI emission is beamed along hollow cones centered at high-latitude polar magnetic field lines located within so-called auroral ovals (e.g., Zarka 1998; Farrell et al. 1999; Zarka 2007). Because of this as well as the rotation and orbital movement of the planet, it may be di ffi cult to align the radio beam with our line of sight (Bastian et al. 2000; Kavanagh & Vedantham 2023). The mag-netic topology of the star–planet interaction also plays a major role in dictating the amount of converted energy (Vidotto et al. 2012; Strugarek et al. 2015; See et al. 2015). The energy con-verted in the magnetospheres can vary by orders of magnitude depending on the angle between the stellar and planetary mag-netic fields and consequently the amount of magnetic reconnec-tion happening between the wind and the planetary magnetic field (Strugarek et al. 2015; Elekes & Saur 2023). Magnetically active stars in particular create di ffi cult conditions for such ob-servations, as magnetic polarity reversals (e.g., at τ Boötis b; Jef-fers et al. 2018; Turner et al. 2021) or transient changes in space weather and stellar outflows (winds, prominence eruptions, and coronal mass ejections; e.g., Callingham et al. 2024) can signif-icantly influence the radiated power and, consequently, result in the beamed planetary emissions having a periodic and erratic on-off nature (Jardine & Collier Cameron 2008; Vidotto et al. 2012; See et al. 2015). Thus, successful follow-up observations may prove exceptionally di ffi cult because of the varying conditions at the exoplanets. Radio observations in the Solar System have shown that the auroral radio powers of all magnetized planets and Ganymede indicate a linear dependence on the Poynting flux of the ambi-ent plasma flow (i.e., the solar wind or magnetospheric plasma; Farrell et al. 1999; Zarka 2007; Zarka et al. 2018). This linear correlation has often been used to predict exoplanetary radio emissions (e.g., Farrell et al. 2003; Lazio et al. 2004; Stevens 2005; Burkhart & Loeb 2017). Extrapolation of this so-called radio-magnetic scaling law (RMSL; also known as the radio-metric Bode law) suggests that especially strongly magnetized gaseous planets close to their host stars should be strong radio emitters, with emitted powers exceeding those of the Solar Sys-tem planets by orders of magnitude. Consequently, the search for exo-radio auroras has been largely focused on close-in gas giants (Griessmeier 2017; Lynch et al. 2018; Weber et al. 2018). However, with the exception of the Jovian moons, the RMSL is based on planets situated in super-Alfvénic solar wind condi-tions with constant energy partition. Although sub-Alfvénic con-ditions prevail in Jupiter’s magnetosphere, our understanding of these conditions cannot necessarily be applied to sub-Alfvénic stellar wind conditions since the Mach numbers, plasma con-ditions, and general magnetic topology can vary significantly, which would have a great e ff ect on the SPMI (Paul & Strugarek 2026). It is assumed that a large number of close-in exoplanets are exposed to sub-Alfvénic winds (Saur et al. 2013; Zhilkin & Bisikalo 2019), and it is not clear whether an extrapolation of the RMSL from super- to sub-Alfvénic conditions is valid. Doubts as to whether the RMSL overestimates radio power have been expressed in the literature (Nichols & Milan 2016; Turnpenney et al. 2020; Cordun et al. 2025). We explored the energetics of exoplanetary radio emis-sions caused by SPMIs in super- and sub-Alfvénic stellar wind regimes by means of 3D magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simu-lations. By studying the relevant energy fluxes, we address the question of whether the RMSL can be extrapolated to a sub-Alfvénic wind regime. We took the Solar System as an exam-ple and studied the energetics of SPMIs as we pushed a Jupiter-like planet closer to the Sun, thus increasing the incident stellar wind power and the stellar XUV flux, which in turn increases the magnetospheric electron population via atmospheric photoion-ization, possibly hindering the generation and escape of radio waves (Treumann 2006; Weber et al. 2017). The paper is struc-tured as follows: In Sect. 2 we describe the stellar wind and plan-etary MHD models. In Sect. 3 we describe the RMSL and our method for calculating the radio powers. We present our predic-tion of the RMSL extrapolation toward the sub-Alfvénic solar wind regime in Sect. 4, which is followed by a discussion on the energetics of the SPMIs and the characteristics of auroral radio source regions in Sect. 5 and our conclusions in Sect. 6. 

2. Numerical simulation 

To study stellar wind-planet interactions and associated plane-tary auroral radio emissions, we need descriptions of the stellar wind and the planetary magnetosphere interacting with the wind. We describe our stellar wind in Sect. 2.1.1 and planetary models in Sect. 2.2.1, followed by a brief description of the simulated stellar winds (Sect. 2.1.2) and planetary magnetosphere (Sect. 2.2.2). 

> 2.1. Stellar wind

Our study of the stellar wind-planet interaction comprises two di ff erent stellar wind models. Our basic stellar wind model is a representation of the nominal solar wind. Many target exoplan-ets arguably orbit more strongly magnetized stars. Hence, we additionally performed stellar wind simulations with a stronger stellar magnetic field. 

> Article number, page 2 of 16 Elekes & Vidotto: The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime

Table 1: Physical simulation parameters. Quantity Symbol Value Unit Stellar model Stellar radius R⋆ 1 R⊙

Stellar mass M⋆ 1 M⊙

Rotation rate Ω⋆ 2.67 × 10 −6 rad /sRadial magnetic field (B1) B⋆ 2.8 GRadial magnetic field (B10) B⋆ 28 GBase coronal density n⋆ 1.25 × 10 8 cm −3

Base coronal temperature T⋆ 1.535 MK XUV flux at 0 .03 au FXUV 2200 erg cm −2 s−1

Planet model Planet radius Rp 69911 km Atmosphere base density n0 10 6 H2 cm −3

Atmosphere scale height H 0.06 Rp

H2-H + collisional cross section σcoll 2 × 10 −15 cm 2

Photo-ion. cross section σph 10 −17 cm 2

Magnetic field strength (Eq.) Bp 1 GTable 2: Varied planetary parameters. a FXUV T ⋆ 

> e

α†

> rec

[au] [erg cm −2 s−1] [K] [cm 2 s−1]0.03 2200 7500 5.098 × 10 −13 

0.04 1238 7500 5.098 × 10 −13 

0.05 792.0 7500 5.098 × 10 −13 

0.07 404.1 7200 5.233 × 10 −13 

0.1 198.0 7200 5.233 × 10 −13 

0.2 49.50 1700 1.318 × 10 −12 

0.4 12.37 1500 1.428 × 10 −12 

0.7 4.041 1400 1.492 × 10 −12 

1.0 1.980 1200 1.647 × 10 −12 

2.0 0.495 1200 1.647 × 10 −12        

> Notes.
> ⋆: Estimated from Koskinen et al. (2010).
> †: Calculated with αrec =4×10 −12 300 K
> Te
> 0.64
> (Storey & Hummer 1995).

2.1.1. Stellar wind model 

We employed the Versatile Advection Code (VAC 4.5; Keppens & Goedbloed 1999) to solve the 1.5D MHD equations for a ther-mally driven magneto-rotator wind (Weber & Davis 1967) in spherical coordinates until a steady state solution was achieved. We solved for the density, the temperature, and the radial and angular components of the magnetic field and velocity that de-pend only on the radial distance. Our model is similar to John-stone et al. (2015b), except that we kept a fixed value of 1 .05 for the polytropic index. The boundary conditions for the wind simulations are based on solar properties, whereby the free pa-rameters, namely the coronal base density n⋆, temperature T⋆

and radial magnetic field strength B⋆ (see Table 1), are adjusted in such a way that the stellar wind solution results in the solar mass loss rate of ˙M⋆ ≈ 3 × 10 −14 M⊙ and terminal wind velocity between 400 and 500 km /s beyond 1 au. The chosen coronal ra-dial magnetic field strength of B⋆ = 2.8 G lies within the range of observed solar values (Johnstone et al. 2015a). The Alfvén radius is at ≈ 0.11 au ≈ 21 R⊙, which is placed near the upper limit of observed solar wind Alfvén radii (Kasper et al. 2021; Cranmer et al. 2023; Badman et al. 2025). We refer to this solar wind model as the B1 model. The physical simulation parame-ters of the stellar wind simulations can be found in Table 1. In addition to the solar wind model, we also considered a stellar wind model with a base magnetic field strength ten times that of the solar model, BB10  

> ⋆

= 28 G, hereinafter referred to as the B10 model. By increasing the magnetic field strength, the Alfvén ra-dius increased to ≈ 1.5 au. The plasma density, pressure, and velocity were only negligibly a ff ected. This allowed us to study the e ff ect of a stronger magnetized stellar wind on possible au-roral radio emission in as isolated a manner as possible, without significantly influencing the wind’s kinetic, thermal, and struc-tural properties. We note that, in reality, more magnetically ac-tive stars should have enhanced coronal magnetic fields that are accompanied by enhancements in mass-loss rates and tempera-ture, which would a ff ect not only the magnetic field of the wind but also its density and velocity. In this study we aimed to test the e ff ect of the wind’s magnetic-to-kinetic energy ratio on plan-etary auroral energetics in an isolated manner, which seems to be the root cause for the validity of the RMSL in the solar wind. Alfvén radius ≈ 0.11 au Alfvén radius ≈ 1.53 au       

> B*= 2.8 G Model (B1) B*= 28 G Model (B10)
> Co-rotation radius ≈0.18 au

Fig. 1: Stellar wind energy fluxes (W /m2) in our basic ( B⊙ = 2.8G) and up-scaled magnetic field model ( B⊙ = 28 G) at various orbital distances (in au). We show the stellar wind Poynting flux (PB) and the kinetic ( Pkin ), thermal ( Pth ), and total ( Ptot ) energy flux in the reference frame of the planets orbiting at a distance of x from the star (Eqs. 1-3). The plasma parameters of both stellar wind models as a func-tion of distance from the star are shown in Appendix A. 

2.1.2. Structure and energetics of the stellar wind 

In Fig. 1 we show the energy fluxes of the modeled stellar winds in the frame of a planet in a circular orbit as a function of orbital distance from the star. The Poynting flux PB, kinetic Pkin and  

> Article number, page 3 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv

thermal Pth energy fluxes are given by the following equations: 

PB = B2sw 

μ0

v⊥ (1) 

Pkin = 12 ρsw v30 (2) 

Pth = nsw kBTsw v0 , (3) where ρsw (x) is the stellar wind plasma density (and nsw the num-ber density), Bsw (x) the magnetic field, v0(x) the relative velocity, and Tsw (x) the temperature. The relative velocity in Eqs. 1-3 is defined as v0 = v − vorb , where v is the wind and vorb the planet’s Keplerian velocity at distance x. The relative velocity perpendic-ular to the wind magnetic field is denoted by v⊥.Our B1 stellar wind model reproduces the solar wind energy partition between kinetic energy and Poynting flux. Thus, the ki-netic energy flux is on the order of 100 times higher than the wind’s Poynting flux beyond 1 au and further out (Zarka 2007). The stellar wind kinetic energy and Poynting flux decay with 1 /r

within the asymptotic regime beyond 1 au. The wind’s Parker spiral was reproduced as well. At 1 au, the stellar wind mag-netic field is at approximately 40 degrees with respect to the star-planet line. The wind speed beyond 1 au is between 400 and 500 km /s and the magnetic field strength at 1 au is approximately 10 −4 G, consistent with solar wind values (Bagenal 2013). At the corotation radius near 0 .18 au, the wind’s magnetic field is aligned with the flow velocity, resulting in a minimum Poynting flux (see Eq. 1). The B10 model conserves the structure of the B1 solar wind model. However, the stellar wind Poynting flux is consistently enhanced by two orders of magnitude due to the increase in stel-lar magnetic field strength by a factor of 10 (since PB ∝ B2sw ). The Alfvén radius is shifted to 1 .53 au, which lies outside of our parameter space for the subsequent simulations. 

2.2. Planetary magnetosphere 

Our planet-centered SPMI model encompasses the interaction of the planetary magnetosphere with the surrounding steady-state stellar wind. We used the simulated stellar wind properties (see A.1) as constant boundary conditions for the SPMI simulations. In the following we describe the MHD model, the parameteri-zations of physical processes governing plasma production and loss, and show the structure of the modeled magnetospheres. 

2.2.1. Planetary MHD model 

We modeled the interaction of a planetary magnetosphere with a steady-state wind using a 3D ideal 1 MHD model. We used the PLUTO code (v. 4.4; Mignone et al. 2007) to numerically solve the following set of ideal MHD equations in spherical coordi- 

> 1With ideal MHD, plasma resistivity is solely driven by numerical di ff usion imposed by the numerical scheme. We refer to Elekes & Saur (2023), where we tested the e ff ect of physical resistivity on the simu-lated quantities in a similar simulation setup and found it to be negligi-ble.

nates, 

∂ρ ∂t + ∇ · ρv = Pm n − Lm p (4) 

∂ρ v

∂t + ∇ · 

"

ρvv + p − BB + 12 B2

#

= −(Lm p + νnρ)v (5) 

∂Et

∂t + ∇ · (Et + pt)v − B(v · B) = − 12 (Lm p + νnρ)v2

− 32 (Lm p + νnρ) p

ρ

+ 32 (Pm n + νnρ) kBTn

mn

(6) 

∂B

∂t − ∇ × [v × B] = 0, (7) where ρ is the plasma density, v is the velocity, B is the magnetic field and p is the thermal pressure. The total energy density is 

Et = ρe + ρv2/2 + B2/2μ0, where e is the specific internal energy and pt the total pressure (e.g., the sum of magnetic and thermal pressure). We used the adiabatic equation of state, p = ρe(γ − 1), to close the system, where γ = 5/3 is the ratio of specific heats. In the right hand side of Eqs. 4-6 we include source terms asso-ciated with elastic ion-neutral collisions caused by the presence of a neutral atmosphere to account for momentum transfer, inter-nal energy transfer, and charge exchange. There, P and L denote plasma production and loss terms, respectively. The quantities 

mn and mp are the masses of neutral and plasma particles, respec-tively. The physical parametrization of P and L will be described in the following paragraphs. 

Atmosphere and magnetic field The parameters of the plane-tary model discussed here can be found in Tables 1 and 2. We considered a radially symmetric neutral atmosphere consisting of molecular hydrogen H 2 with the density following a baromet-ric law, 

nn(r) = nn,0 exp Rp − rH

!

, (8) where nn is the neutral number density, r is the distance from the planet’s center and H = 0.06 Rp is the scale height, where 

Rp = 69911 km is the planet’s radius (i.e., one Jupiter radius). The scale height was chosen to su ffi ciently resolve the atmo-sphere with our numerical grid. At the inner simulation bound-ary we assumed a neutral number density of nn,0 = 1 × 10 6

cm −3, which roughly corresponds to an upper atmosphere with pressure in the millibar range. Collisions between the static at-mosphere (i.e., it does not evolve during the simulation) and the plasma are modeled using a collision frequency νc on the order of 1 s −1, so that νn ≈ σc nn(r) ¯ v, with a characteristic plasma velocity ¯ v and the ion-neutral collisional cross section 

σc = 2 × 10 −15 cm 2 (e.g., Johnstone et al. 2018). Ion-neutral col-lisions pose a sink of kinetic energy that is included in Eqs. 5 and 6. We also accounted for charge-exchange between plasma and neutral particles and associated exchange of internal energy between the colliding particles (Eq. 6). Photoionization through XUV radiation is the main driver of atmospheric escape in hydrogen-rich atmospheres (e.g., Lammer et al. 2003) whose rates typically exceed those of other ioniza-tion processes such as electron impact ionization (e.g., Voronov 1997). Inspired by this, plasma production in our model is solely driven by photoionization of the neutral H 2 atmosphere. The 

> Article number, page 4 of 16 Elekes & Vidotto: The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime

# 0.03 au 0.2 au 1 au 0.2 au 0.1 au 0.03 au 

# B * =2.8 G (B1 model) B * =28 G (B10 model) 

Fig. 2: XZ plane cross sections of the simulation domain for planets at various orbital distances. Arrows indicate velocity vectors and their magnitudes (left colorbar). Contours show plasma density (right colorbar). Solid lines show magnetic field line projections. We show the results for the basic (B1; left ) and enhanced magnetic field model (B10; right ). The panels show di ff erent zoom levels, as the magnetospheres have di ff erent sizes. production term ( P) in Eqs. 4-6 is defined as 

P = σph nn(r) FXUV e−τ , (9) where σph is the photo-absorption cross section of the neutral particles and FXUV is the stellar incident XUV flux. The optical depth τ is integrated along a line starting from the XUV source at the outer, substellar simulation boundary at r0, to the respective position within the neutral atmosphere at r,

τ =

Z rr0

nn(r) σph dr . (10) In Appendix B we provide a schematic illustrating to illustrate the geometry of the coordinate system and optical depth integra- 

> Article number, page 5 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv

tion. We assumed an XUV flux of FXUV = 2200 erg cm −2 s−1 at a distance of 0 .03 au from the star. This value is placed within the lower range of typical XUV fluxes of Sun-like stars (Sanz-Forcada et al. 2011) and slightly above the respective XUV flux of the Sun (Ribas et al. 2005). We furthermore assumed that the entire XUV energy is concentrated at 16 .7 eV to max-imize the H 2 photoionization cross section, which accordingly amounts to σph = 1 × 10 −17 cm 2, slightly above the ionization threshold at 15 .44 eV (Heays et al. 2017). The estimated max-imum ionization rate at 1 au with an atmosphere base density of nn = 10 6 H2 cm −3 is approximately 9 × 10 −7 s−1, which was required for the simulations to be stable and su ffi ciently fast. We considered plasma loss due to dissociative recombination of ions with free electrons. The recombination rate of hydrogen ions, αrec (Table 2), was obtained from Storey & Hummer (1995) by assuming electron temperatures Te for planets at di ff erent or-bital positions in the range 1200 - 7500 K (Koskinen et al. 2010). The recombination rate depends only weakly on Te and thus the uncertainties of our assumed values have no significant e ff ect on the results of this work. The associated loss terms in Eqs. 4-6 are defined as 

L = αrec n (r)( n(r) − nsw ) (11) and also account for associated cooling and kinetic energy loss of the plasma (Eq. 6). Recombination is switched o ff if the plasma density falls below the background stellar wind density nsw .We assumed a dipolar planetary magnetic field with its axis perpendicular to the orbital plane. The equatorial field strength was set to 1 G for all models.  

> Numerical model

Equations 4-7 were integrated using the Harten-Lax-Van Leer Riemann solver with the minmod flux lim-iter. Time-stepping was achieved with the second order Runge-Kutta method. To ensure the ∇ · B = 0 condition, the extended mixed hyperbolic-parabolic divergence cleaning technique was utilized (Dedner et al. 2002; Mignone et al. 2010). The numerical schemes used in this study pose a particularly di ff use setup. The di ff usivity introduced by the scheme directly a ff ects magnetic re-connection rates and thus likely a ff ects the magnetic dissipation and Poynting fluxes within the magnetosphere. In Appendix C we present an additional numerical test and a discussion on the sensitivity of our Poynting flux calculations on numerical di ff u-sivity, which we found to be minor to the results of this study. The use of a less di ff use numerical scheme resulted in more re-solved small-scale structures in plasma density and a slight in-crease in the auroral Poynting flux (i.e., Eq. 15) by a factor of about 1 .2. The spherical grid, ranging from 1 Rp (inner boundary) to 60 Rp (outer boundary), consisted of 230 × 72 × 96 grid cells in 

r, θ, and ϕ dimensions. The finest r-resolution was 0 .02 Rp. The cell size gradually increased by a factor of ≈ 1.01 from 1 .2 Rp

to 12 Rp and by a factor of ≈ 1.03 from 12 Rp to 70 Rp. The grid was equidistant in the ϕ direction. We transformed the grid into a Cartesian grid in post-processing. The x-axis is aligned with the relative velocity of the wind. The z-axis is parallel to the planetary magnetic moment and rotation axis. The y-axis com-pletes the right-handed coordinate system. The longitude ( ϕ) is measured counterclockwise from the positive y-axis. The stellar wind enters through the inflow boundary with ϕ ≤ 180 ◦. More details on the coordinate system can be found in Appendix B. 

> 2.2.2. Structure of the magnetic star–planet interaction

In Fig. 2 we show 2D slices of the simulated magnetosphere for a planet at several orbital distances with the basic stellar wind (B1, B⋆ = 2.8 G) and with the stronger magnetized wind (B10, 

B⋆ = 28 G). With the B1 stellar wind model, the Alfvén ra-dius is at 0 .11 au. Therefore, the planets with x ≤ 0.1 au gen-erate Alfvén wings with only one wing connecting to the star. The plasma density is generally higher in the upstream Alfvén wing and lower in the downstream Alfvén wing. The planet at 0.2 au resides within a trans-Alfvénic regime, where the mag-netic lobes connected with the stellar wind field show a degen-erate Alfvén wing-like structure, although a bow shock without a clearly visible division between shock and magnetosheath is formed upstream of the planet. The planets with x > 0.2 au show super-Alfvénic interactions, with downstream oriented magnetic lobes, a bow shock and fairly thick magnetosheath. As a result of magnetic reconnection in the magnetospheric tail, high velocity flows emerge from the downstream side. With the B10 wind model all considered planets reside within the sub-Alfvénic regime. Therefore, solely the size of the magnetosphere increases from 0 .03 au to 1 au due to the stellar wind total pressure decay while the principle magneto-spheric structure is conserved. The planet at 0 .03 au has a van-ishing magnetopause radius of about 1 .2 Rp and nearly the entire planet is permeated by reconnected (and thus open) magnetic field lines. We note that for the B10 models, we only simulated the planet up to a distance of 0 .2 au due to numerical artifacts occurring at larger distances caused by low plasma densities. 

3. Auroral radio emission and the RMSL 

For planetary auroral radio emission to occur, a mechanism to produce energetic electrons is needed. Such a mechanism is the stellar wind-magnetosphere interaction, in which magnetic re-connection accelerates electrons most commonly in the mag-netotail. Those electrons gyrate around magnetic field lines as they are launched toward the magnetic poles. In this study we only considered stellar-wind-driven auroras. A discussion on ra-dio emission from rotationally dominated magnetospheres can be found in Nichols (2011).  

> Energetics of ECMI radio emission

Following Elekes & Saur (2023), we divided the conversion from stellar wind energy to auroral radio emission into separate conversion processes. The transfer e ffi ciency of total stellar wind energy flux ( Ptot =

PB + Pkin + Pth ; Eqs. 1-3) incident on the magnetospheric cross section Ams (Psw = Ptot · Ams ) to auroral Poynting fluxes within the planetary magnetosphere ( Pa) is characterized by the transfer function ( T ), 

T = Pa

Psw 

. (12) The magnetospheric cross section Ams = π R2mp is obtained from the stellar wind-magnetosphere pressure balance at the upstream magnetopause (in SI units), 

Rmp = Rp B1/3 

> p

(2 μ0)−1/6

"

ρsw v20 + psw + Bsw 

2μ0

#−1/6

, (13) with the planetary equatorial magnetic field strength Bp. Subse-quently, the auroral Poynting fluxes provide the electromagnetic energy to drive electron acceleration and finally the ECMI. We 

> Article number, page 6 of 16 Elekes & Vidotto: The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime

characterize the e ffi ciency of electron acceleration and the ECMI mechanism using the radio e ffi ciency ϵr, so that the auroral radio power Pradio can be written as 

Pradio = ϵr Pa = ϵr T P sw . (14) As a measure of electromagnetic energy transported along plan-etary magnetic field lines, we calculate the auroral Poynting flux 

Pa, which is formulated as the vector projection of the Poynting vector, S = E × B/μ 0, onto the unperturbed planetary magnetic dipole, S · B0/B0 (Keiling et al. 2003; Elekes & Saur 2023). This formulation of the Poynting flux captures electromagnetic en-ergy mostly associated with Alfvén waves, which play a major role in auroral particle acceleration (Keiling et al. 2003; Saur et al. 2018). We assume that all the Poynting flux Pa provided to an infinitesimally thin spherical shell around the planet is dissi-pated within this shell by radio emission, regardless from which direction the Poynting flux is provided, so that we can calculate the total dissipated power as 

Pa =

I

> A

|S · B0

B0

| dA , (15) where A is the surface area of the spherical shell with radius 

R. Our Poynting flux formulation assumes complete and irre-versible dissipation due to radio emission (following Elekes & Saur 2023; see our Appendix C for a discussion on the e ff ect of numerical dissipation on the computed Poynting fluxes). Thus, our subsequent radio predictions will serve as upper limit esti-mates. The Poynting flux close to the planet only weakly de-pends on the radial position. At Earth and the outer planets, the electrons are usually accelerated at altitudes ≫ Rp (Zarka 1998, 2007) and the ECMI source regions typically lie above the iono-sphere at altitudes of ≳ 2 Rp (e.g., Zarka 1998; Lamy et al. 2018; Wu et al. 2026). For simplicity, we set the radius of the integra-tion surface to 2 Rp for all models. Due to our formulation of the auroral Poynting flux, the in-tegration in Eq. 15 is e ff ectively done over the cross section of a northern and southern auroral oval since the integrated auro-ral Poynting fluxes are preferably parallel to the magnetic field close to the open-closed field line boundary (OCFB). We return to this point in Sect. 5.2 when discussing Fig. 6, where we can see an impression on the distribution of the integrated Poynting fluxes.  

> Relationship between the RMSL and the numerically derived radio emission

In the Solar System, the RMSL appears to re-liably function only in its magnetic variant (Zarka et al. 2018). Thus, the radio power based on the RMSL is described as fol-lows, with the stellar wind Poynting flux incident on the magne-tosphere PB = PB · Ams and the e ffi ciency factor, η,

PRMSL radio = η PB . (16) The e ffi ciency factor has been observationally constrained to η =

3 × 10 −3 (Zarka et al. 2018). According to the RMSL, the prod-uct of the e ffi ciencies (Eq. 14) should be constant ( T ϵr = const.) and thus it should follow that T ∝ ϵ−1 

> r

. Although the RMSL works well for the Solar System planets, it has not been validated in the more energetic and sub-Alfvénic solar wind regime (i.e., closer to the star) and therefore it is not yet clear whether the RMSL also applies to close-in exoplanets. Doubts have already been expressed as to whether the RMSL also works for close-in exoplanets and whether the estimated radio powers overestimate the true powers (e.g., Nichols & Milan 2016; Turnpenney et al. 2020; Cordun et al. 2025; Evensberget et al. 2026). To test the behavior of the RMSL in the more energetic regime, we needed to characterize the behavior of both e ffi ciencies, T and ϵr, for di ff erent stellar wind energy partitions. In this study we aimed to further constrain T while also inferring implications for the expected behavior of ϵr, whose physics cannot be studied by means of MHD simulations due to the microphysical processes involved in electron acceleration and the ECMI mechanism.  

> Efficiency and ionospheric permeability of ECMI radio emis-sion

The e ffi ciency of the ECMI mechanism depends on how close the generated radio waves come to the resonance condi-tion given by local plasma conditions, which depends on the gyro frequency, fg = eB /(2 πme), and electron plasma frequency, 

fp = pne e2/meϵ0/(2 π), both in SI units, where me is the elec-tron mass, B is the magnetic field strength and ne the electron density (e.g., equal to the ion density). In general, ECMI emis-sion is generated most e ffi ciently in plasma depleted regions with 

fg > fp (Treumann 2006). This also holds for electron accel-eration in general, while strong magnetic fields and low den-sities are preferable (Saur et al. 2018). The ECMI e ffi ciency is maximal when fg ≫ fp, reaching values on the order of 

≈ 0.01 − 0.1 (Treumann 2006; Lamy et al. 2011). Furthermore, self-absorption of radio waves in the plasma of the source re-gion, as well as their reflection, occurs when fg < fp (Treumann 2006; Weber et al. 2017). In this study we calculated the ratio fg/ fp in the expected source regions (i.e., at 2 Rp) to both characterize the ECMI e ffi -ciency and to test whether emission can escape the local plasma, 

fg/ fp = B

r ϵ0

neme

. (17) We consider locations in the magnetosphere that satisfy fg/ fp >

1 to be favorable for both the generation and transmission of ECMI radio emission. 

4. The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime 

Following the RMSL (Zarka et al. 2018), in Fig. 3 we plot the predicted radio power ( Pradio ; Eq. 14) as a function of the stel-lar wind Poynting flux times the magnetospheric cross section 

PB. The radio e ffi ciency ϵr is not known. We assumed that the RMSL is valid at planets within the super-Alfvénic solar wind, so we could calibrate the radio e ffi ciency in such a way that our radio predictions ( Pradio ) and those of the RMSL ( PRMSL radio ) coin-cide. We assumed that the calibrated radio e ffi ciency is the same for all planets regardless of the stellar wind regime. With a cal-ibrated radio e ffi ciency of ϵr = 10 −3, the predicted radio pow-ers of planets in the super-Alfvénic Solar System planets regime consistently match the powers predicted by the RMSL. We used 

ϵr = 10 −3 for all further calculations in this study. In Fig. 3 we show radio powers with solar wind condi-tions (B1 model) and with the more magnetic stellar wind (B10 model) together with those predicted by the RMSL (Eq. 16). Via calibration of the radio e ffi ciency, the radio power in the Solar System regime (blue shaded area in Fig. 3) and B1 model match the predictions of the RMSL. Above an incident Poynting flux of 10 14 W (outside the blue shaded area), the B1 solar wind tran-sitions to its sub-Alfvénic regime, from where our predicted ra-dio powers diverge consistently from the RMSL predictions. The  

> Article number, page 7 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv

radio powers are reduced by one order of magnitude in the ba-sic solar wind (B1). With the more strongly magnetized stellar wind model (B10), the radio powers drop by more than two or-ders of magnitude further away from the star ( > 0.05 au). For both wind models, closer to the star the radio powers approach the RMSL predictions. In general, it can be said that in the sub-Alfvénic regime, the radio powers are significantly reduced com-pared to the RMSL predictions. However, it is unclear whether the assumed radio e ffi ciency increases closer to the star due to higher reconnection rates, which was not taken into account in this study. In order for our B1 model to be consistent with the RMSL, the radio e ffi ciency in the sub-Alfvénic regime would have to be consistently about one order of magnitude greater, 

ϵr ≈ 10 −2, implicitly suggesting a possible increase in the ef-ficiency of the ECMI mechanism and the electron acceleration associated with the transition to a sub-Alfvénic interaction. For the B10 model to be consistent with the RMSL, the radio e ffi -ciency would need to be about two orders of magnitude greater above 0 .07 au, ϵr ≈ 10 −1, which is unlikely to occur given the theoretical expectations of the ECMI and electron acceleration effi ciencies (Treumann 2006). We note that it is unclear whether the calibrated e ffi ciency also applies to the B10 model, as the stronger magnetic field would influence the reconnection rate and thus the electron ac-celeration. However, the transfer function, which implicitly in-cludes the energy transfer and reconnection e ffi ciency, is sim-ilar close to the star in the B1 and B10 scenarios, and signifi-cantly reduced in the B10 model at greater orbital distances, as we show in Sect. 5.1. The radio e ffi ciency, on the other hand, is primarily determined by the magnetospheric magnetic field-to electron density ratio (e.g., Treumann 2006). The planetary magnetic field remains unchanged in both models. The electron density is influenced by XUV radiation, which also remains un-changed, and plasma convection, which will be a ff ected by the stellar wind magnetic field through reconnection processes. The ECMI favorability condition (Eq. 17), fg/ fp is less dependent on the electron density ( ∝ n−1/2 

> e

) compared to the magnetic field (∝ B), so we expect the planetary magnetic field to remain the dominant factor in radio e ffi ciency. Hence, we expect our cali-brated radio e ffi ciency to remain within the same order of mag-nitude and thus to also be approximately representative for the B10 model. Our Pradio values implicitly assume that all the regions around the planet at 2 Rp will satisfy the condition fg/ fp > 1(Sect. 3). If we instead integrate the auroral Poynting flux (Eq. 15) exclusively over regions flagged as ECMI-favorable ( fg/ fp >

1), we get an estimate of the actual radio power escaping the magnetosphere (circles in Fig. 3). Hence, we considered the ra-tio fg/ fp at 2 Rp and flagged the associated cells accordingly. The closer a planet is to its star, the higher the XUV-driven photoionization. The increased electron density leads to a de-creasing fg/ fp ratio, associated with poorer ECMI conditions, as long as the planetary magnetic field and other sources and sinks of electrons remain unchanged. Consequently, Fig. 3 shows for the B1 model that radio powers further decrease by about one or-der of magnitude close to the star ( < 0.1 au, B1 model), which is consistent with the study of Weber et al. (2017). In comparison to the RMSL predictions, our calculated radio powers are up to two orders of magnitude smaller, with this discrepancy vanishing at larger orbital distances due to weaker photoionization. The re-duction in radio power drops abruptly at 0 .1 au, even though the radio conditions generally suggest the opposite as we show later in this section. The expected radio powers of escaping emission Radio-magnetic scaling Solar wind conditions Stronger stellar magnetic  fi eld Solar system planets Escaping ECMI emission 0.03 au 0.2 au 1 au 0.03 au Decreasing orbital distance 

Fig. 3: Predicted radio power ( Pradio ) as a function of inci-dent stellar wind Poynting flux times the magnetospheric cross section ( PB) in watts. RMSL predictions (Zarka et al. 2018) are shown as a solid line. Radio powers calculated from au-roral Poynting fluxes (Eq. 15) multiplied by a radio e ffi ciency, 

ϵr = 10 −3, are shown with black (B1) and gray (B10) triangles. Accompanying circles show the radio power if only escaping ECMI emission is considered. For each curve, the models range from close (rightmost points) to distant (leftmost points) plane-tary orbits. The blue shaded area roughly depicts the Solar Sys-tem planets’ regime. in the B10 model are virtually una ff ected by photoionization re-gardless of the orbital distance. This will be discussed below by taking the ECMI conditions into account. In Fig. 4 we show the incident power together with the inte-grated auroral Poynting flux (top panels, Eq. 15) used to cal-culate the radio powers to better illustrate the energy conver-sion at various orbital distances. The resulting radio powers and those predicted by the RMSL are shown as a function of or-bital distance. The radio powers obtained by integrating all au-roral Poynting fluxes (downward triangles) are color-coded to show the volume fraction of the respective magnetospheres in which ECMI emission is likely produced and may also escape ( fg/ fp > 1). Darker colors indicate worse radio conditions. Ac-cordingly, Fig. 4 suggests that, in addition to the radio trans-parency of the ionosphere in close orbits (B1 model), particularly in the hot Jupiter regime, reduced ECMI e ffi ciency can also be expected as it also depends on the fg/ fp ratio. Therefore, we ex-pect that in reality the radio power near the star could be further reduced due to the ECMI operating at lower e ffi ciencies. In the B10 model, the expected radio powers by taking the radio con-ditions into account are una ff ected by photoionization. On the contrary, overall radio conditions seem to be improving closer to the star, whereby the order of magnitude of fg/ fp remains the same, but the extent of the favorable regions increases. This is a consequence of the stronger stellar magnetic field and enhanced energy release during reconnection, resulting in increased recon-nection rates (i.e., high velocity outflows). Stronger magnetic stresses accelerate plasma out of the magnetosphere and into the planet, where the plasma is absorbed, e ff ectively leading to the depletion of the magnetosphere. In addition, the higher mag-netic pressure of the wind results in a smaller magnetosphere and consequently smaller zones of closed field lines in which photo-

> Article number, page 8 of 16 Elekes & Vidotto: The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime Alfvén radius
> Co-rotation radius Solar system planets Hot Jupiter regime

B * =2.8 G (B1 model) B * =28 G (B10 model)            

> Alfvén radius ≈1.53 au Magnetosphere fraction with f g/f p>1 Magnetosphere fraction with f g/f p>1 Co-rotation radius

Fig. 4: Top panels : Integrated stellar wind energy and auroral Poynting flux at various orbital distances. Bottom panels : Predicted radio powers according to the RMSL and based on the simulated auroral Poynting flux (colored downward triangles). Blue circles show the predicted radio power of escaping ECMI emission ( fg > fp). We indicate the typical regimes of hot Jupiters (red) and Solar System planets (blue). ionized material can be trapped (Carolan et al. 2021). In Sect. 5.2 we discuss this case in more detail. Also visible in Fig. 4 is the break in the trend of auro-ral Poynting fluxes and resulting radio power between the sub-Alfvénic and super-Alfvénic regimes (B1). The power is greatly reduced near the corotation radius where the stellar wind veloc-ity component is parallel to the background magnetic field (see also Fig. 1). In the B1 wind scenario, the planets at 0 .2 and 0 .4 au exhibit approximately the same auroral Poynting flux and radio power. Lastly, we note that our choice of the planetary mag-netic field strength has a large impact on the fg/ fp ratio and that stronger magnetic fields will enhance the local gyrofrequency. However, this assumption does not a ff ect the general trend in the solar wind scenario that ECMI conditions are worsened by increased XUV radiation near the star. In conclusion, by placing a planet in the sub-Alfvénic stel-lar wind regime, we found that the predicted radio powers fall significantly below those predicted by the RMSL (Zarka et al. 2018). By considering the ECMI conditions a ff ected by atmo-spheric photoionization, the predicted radio powers are further reduced if the planets are close to the star in a wind similar to the solar wind ( ≪ 1 au). Increasing the wind magnetic field en-hances the discrepancy between our radio predictions and the RMSL but at the same time reduces the impact of photoioniza-tion on the ECMI conditions due to less evaporated material be-ing trapped in the closed magnetosphere. We used a constant ra-dio e ffi ciency ϵr = 10 −3 that we calibrated in the super-Alfvénic Solar System regime (B1). It is uncertain whether this e ffi ciency is also applicable to the B10 model, but we do not expect an in-fluence on the e ffi ciency to overcome the power deficit of up to two orders of magnitude. 

5. Energetics and source regions of auroral radio emission 

In this section we discuss the energetics of the modeled magneto-spheres in more detail by studying the wind-magnetosphere en-ergy transfer (Sect. 5.1). Subsequently, we take into account the spatial distribution of auroral Poynting fluxes to identify radio-favorable regions of the magnetosphere (Sect. 5.2). 

5.1. Stellar wind-magnetosphere energy transfer 

In Fig. 5 we show the transfer function T (Eq. 12), together with the partial transfer functions, TB = Pa/PB and Tk = Pa/Pkin ,in which only the incident magnetic and kinetic powers are con-sidered, respectively. We note that the partial transfer functions relate to the total transfer function as T −1 

> B

+T −1 

> k

∝ T −1, where we ignored the thermal contribution of the incident flux. The bottom panels of Fig. 5 show the ratio of stellar wind magnetic to kinetic energy flux in the rest frame moving with a planet at position x.In the appendix we show a complementary plot of the transfer function as a function of energy partition (Fig. D.1). While T

must always be less than one, since no energy can be produced, the partial transfer functions can. Such situations indicate that the respective incident magnetic or kinetic power cannot provide enough energy for the present auroral Poynting fluxes. Conse-quently, we can see from Fig. 5 that the closer a partial transfer function is to the total transfer function, the more dominant the corresponding incident energy flux is. With the B1 solar wind model, the total transfer function assumes values between 0 .01 at large orbital distances and up to 0 .4 close to the star. The comparison with the magnetic-to-kinetic energy flux ratio of the stellar wind suggests a posi-tive correlation between T and the stellar wind energy partition, 

PB/Pkin (see also Fig. D.1). However, while the energy partition in the B1 model reaches 10 at 0 .03 au, it is two orders of magni- 

> Article number, page 9 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv Co-rotation radius Alfvén radius Solar system planets
> Hot Jupiter regime

B * =2.8 G (B1 model) B * =28 G (B10 model)     

> Tmagnetic ≈Ttotal Co-rotation radius

Fig. 5: Top panels : Transfer function (Eq. 12) and partial transfer functions (i.e., only considering magnetic and kinetic energy fluxes) as a function of orbital distance from the star. The partial transfer function relates to the total transfer function as T −1 

> B

+ T −1 

> k

∝ T −1.With a large partial transfer function, the corresponding wind energy flux cannot provide enough energy for the integrated auroral Poynting flux. Bottom panels : Stellar wind Poynting flux-to-kinetic energy flux ratio. tude larger in the B10 model, while the maximum e ffi cient trans-fer function T remains virtually unchanged ( Tmax ≈ 0.3 − 0.4 in both models). Accordingly, simply increasing the wind magnetic field strength is not su ffi cient to achieve higher transfer e ffi cien-cies. This suggests that the increased auroral Poynting flux and radio power in the B10 scenario is dominantly caused by the higher energy content of the wind, and not by a substantial in-crease in the energy transfer e ffi ciency. Furthermore, with the B10 stellar wind model and at distances ≥ 0.1 au, the transfer function drops below 10 −2, one order of magnitude smaller than in the respective B1 wind scenario. This occurs at an energy par-tition of PB ≈ 10 Pkin (see Fig. D.1). At the same energy parti-tion, the transfer function in the B10 wind scenario, T ≈ 0.08 (at x ≈ 0.2 au), lies about two orders of magnitude below the respective value in the B1 solar wind scenario ( x = 0.03 au). The transfer functions in the two wind models are only comparable at close distances to the star ( x ≤ 0.04 au), where they reach 0.3 − 0.4. At greater distances, the transfer function in the B10 case quickly decreases to values below 0 .04 (at 0 .05 au) and be-low 0 .01 (at 0 .1 au) while under solar wind conditions (B1), T

remains within the same order of magnitude (0 .1-0 .2, x = 0.04-0.1 au). Thus, our models suggest an overall less e ffi cient wind-to-magnetosphere energy transfer with more magnetic winds. 

> 5.2. Source regions and local conditions of radio emission

In this section we study the spatial distribution of expected auro-ral radio emission sources by taking into account the asymmetric distribution of Poynting fluxes and ionospheric plasma caused by photoionization. In Fig. 6 we show maps of the auroral Poynting flux per unit area (i.e., S a = |S · B0/B0|) on a sphere with radius 2 Rp centered on the planet. According to the maps, we expect radio emission to be produced preferentially at high latitudes, confined to nar-row bands close to the OCFB (dashed white lines) and mostly along open field lines. This regions are commonly referred to as auroral ovals (e.g., Wu et al. 2026). Radio powers increase with shorter distance to the star in accordance with the enhanced energy density of the wind. Intensities maximize at the flanks of the planet and on the night side. In all modeled magneto-spheres, expected radio intensities peak within the northern au-roral ovals, since the upstream wind magnetic field always con-nects to the northern hemisphere of the planet, while the southern hemisphere field connects downstream to the wind. Hence, the northern hemisphere is more open to plasma and energy injec-tion by the stellar wind. The maps show contour lines of fg/ fp ratios to indicate ECMI-favorable ( fg/ fp > 1) and non-favorable source regions. In the case of strong photoionization, the favorable radio source regions are preferably found at the night side caused by lower electron densities due the absence of photoionization. In the solar wind scenario (B1), the sizes of the nightside source re-gions narrow the closer the planet is to the star due to the en-hanced XUV flux penetrating further into the nightside hemi-sphere. Consequently, within our B1 model, the size of the source regions is negatively correlated with the intensity of the incident XUV flux. Furthermore, within the sub-Alfvénic so-lar wind, favorable source regions are exclusively found in the southern hemisphere. Plasma accumulates within the northern wing (see also Fig. 2), while the downstream wing gets depleted by outflows partially caused by nightside reconnection. From about 0 .1 au to larger distances, both auroral ovals exhibit ECMI-favorable conditions regardless of stellar irradiance. The residual influence of photoionization is only visible on the day side with increased electron densities near the magnetic equator, trapped within closed magnetic field lines (e.g., at 0 .2 au in Fig. 6). At greater orbital distances the entire magnetospheres exhibit favor-able ECMI conditions, suggesting that atmospheric photoioniza-tion at outer planets has no significant e ff ect on expected auroral radio emission. With the B10 model, the ECMI conditions are significantly improved. At 0 .03 au, there is hardly any closed magnetosphere, so evaporated plasma can easily escape. In general, the stronger stellar magnetic field causes reconnection to be associated with higher magnetic stresses, causing strong outflows out of the radio source regions. Our results therefore suggest that planets close to the star can indeed exhibit good radio conditions despite the strong ionization of the atmosphere. The depletion of the mag-

> Article number, page 10 of 16 Elekes & Vidotto: The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime

# B * =2.8 G (B1 model) B * =28 G (B10 model) 

# 0.03 au x0.07 au x0.03 au 0.2 au x0.2 au 1 au Open-closed fi eld line boundary 0.1 au x0.07 au xupstream downstream upstream downstream xxStarward Alfvén wing 

Fig. 6: Mercator projection maps of auroral Poynting flux, S a = |S· B0/B0| (in W /m2), over a sphere with R = 2Rp at di ff erent orbital distances. The spatial structure of radio powers coincides with the auroral Poynting flux (Eq. 15) and thus illustrates the integration across the auroral oval done in Eq. 15. Dashed lines represent the OCFB. Contour lines show the fg/ fp ratio. The x and y axes show the longitude ( ϕ) and colatitude ( θ), respectively. The upstream side is at ϕ < 180 ◦. Red x’s mark the exterior of ECMI-favorable regions where fg/ fp < 1. A missing x indicates fg/ fp > 1 everywhere. netosphere, caused by the open magnetic flux and reconnection-driven outflows, dominates over plasma production via pho-toionization and trapping of evaporated material within closed field lines. The generally higher proportion of open field lines (evident in the lower latitudes of the OCFB) reinforces the ten-dency to form open channels through which plasma can escape from the magnetosphere. The extent of the auroral oval and thus the total auroral power is tied to the OCFB and consequently the area of open magnetic flux. In general, open flux regions enhance in size closer to the star due to the stronger wind magnetic field, with this e ff ect being most pronounced in the strongly magnetized B10 wind. The area of open flux is consistently larger in the B10 models compared to solar wind conditions, reaching nearly 100 % surface coverage at 0.03 au. As open magnetic field lines act as channels for energy and mass transfer with the stellar wind, planets close to strongly magnetized stars generally have the largest potential for intense auroral Poynting fluxes. However, the strength of the planetary field has also an e ff ect on the size of the open flux region, which has not been varied in our simulations. 

6. Conclusions and summary 

We studied the energetics of exoplanetary auroral radio emission in sub- and super-Alfvénic stellar wind regimes at various or-bital distances from the star. The main question was whether the 

> Article number, page 11 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv 

empirical RMSL established in the Solar System can be extrapo-lated to close-in planets in sub-Alfvénic stellar winds. To address this question, we performed 3D MHD simulations of the stellar wind–magnetosphere interaction of a Jupiter-like planet with a 1 G dipolar magnetic field. We explored two wind scenarios, one similar to the solar wind and a more magnetized wind model. We calculated auroral Poynting fluxes, Pa (Eq. 15), the e ffi ciency of energy transfer from the stellar wind to the auroral ovals (the transfer function, T ; Eq. 12), and the expected radio power (Eq. 14) assuming a constant radio e ffi ciency, ϵr. We calibrated this radio e ffi ciency by comparing our predictions with the powers predicted by the RMSL in the super-Alfvénic solar wind, given that the RMSL is valid in the Solar System and only depends on the incident stellar wind power. With this, our calibrated radio effi ciency (i.e., combined electron acceleration and ECMI e ffi -ciency) is ϵr = 10 −3, and we also adopted this value in the sub-Alfvénic regime due to the lack of observational constraints. In the super-Alfvénic solar wind regime, the transfer function ( T )has to be anti-proportional to the radio e ffi ciency ( ϵr) in order for the RMSL to hold (Sect. 3), which is fulfilled within our mod-eling. Hence, our results suggest that the combined e ffi ciency of electron acceleration and the ECMI mechanism in the super-Alfvénic solar wind amounts to ϵr ≈ 10 −3.Our results show that the auroral radio power in the sub-Alfvénic regime is consistently below the RMSL predictions (Fig. 3), indicating that the extrapolation of the RMSL to close-in exoplanets may not be valid in general. This discrepancy in-creases with stronger stellar wind magnetic fields. We argue that, based on calculations of the ionospheric electron gyro-to-plasma frequency ratio, the radio e ffi ciency ( ϵr) will likely not increase enough in a sub-Alfvénic wind to overcome the discrepancy between our predicted and the expected (i.e., predicted by the RMSL) radio powers. In the solar wind, our predicted radio pow-ers are about one order of magnitude lower than the RMSL pre-dictions, with the discrepancy increasing by up to two orders of magnitude with the more magnetized wind model. Furthermore, we studied the e ffi ciency of transfer from stel-lar wind energy to auroral Poynting fluxes and found a maximum effi ciency of about 0 .3 close to the star with both wind models. At greater distances, the transfer e ffi ciency decreases to 0 .05-0 .1(B1) and to 0 .007-0 .04 (B10); the lowest values are found at the greatest distances to the star. Consequently, we found a negative correlation of the transfer e ffi ciency (i.e., the transfer function, 

T ) with the strength of the stellar wind magnetic field. Hence, the transfer function ( T ) positively correlates with the stellar wind energy partition ( PB/Pkin ). For the RMSL to be valid in all wind conditions, the radio e ffi ciency must be anticorrelated with 

T , implying that the e ffi ciency must vary by one to two orders of magnitude to achieve a constant incident energy flux-to-radio power relation (i.e., to fulfill the RMSL). We explored the spatial structure of the emission, restricting the integration of auroral Poynting fluxes to only regions of the magnetosphere where the electron gyrofrequency is higher than the electron plasma frequency. In the solar wind scenario, the ex-pected radio power is further reduced since, although the inten-sities of auroral Poynting fluxes increase closer to the star, only a small fraction of Poynting fluxes are located within ECMI-favorable regions. This leads to a maximum deviation of radio powers of about two orders of magnitude from the RMSL. This eff ect is strongest in the sub-Alfvénic regime (i.e., near the star), where photoionization plays a major role by populating the iono-sphere with electrons, which in turn prohibit the generation and escape of ECMI radio emission. In the case of a more strongly magnetized stellar wind, planets very close to the star o ff er better radio conditions than in solar wind conditions. Due to the higher magnetic pressure, the resulting smaller magnetosphere, and the larger proportion of open planetary magnetic flux, ionized mate-rial can be carried away from the planet’s auroral regions driven by magnetic reconnection more e ffi ciently, which improves the radio conditions considerably and eliminates the mitigating ef-fect of photoionization. However, since more strongly magne-tized stars are also expected to emit higher levels of XUV, ra-dio conditions for such stars will in the end be determined by the balance of XUV-driven electron production and the magnetic reconnection-driven electron depletion processes. Nevertheless, due to the significantly less e ffi cient wind-to-magnetosphere en-ergy transfer compared to the solar wind case, the expected ra-dio powers deviate by about two orders of magnitude from the RMSL predictions even though the ECMI emission might be produced more e ffi ciently. With regard to cool stars with stronger magnetic fields, we expect a significantly larger overestimation of radio powers by the RMSL. Our assessment of the spatial distribution of expected ra-dio power shows that the emission maximizes within a narrow band at high latitudes, near the OCFB. Peak emission is gener-ally expected on the night side and at the flanks of the planet. The absence of photoionization in the planet’s shadow leads to a reduced electron density on the night side, considerably favor-ing the generation and escape of radio emission in solar wind conditions. In stronger magnetized winds, the depletion of the magnetosphere due to reconnection-driven outflows dominates over the e ff ect of photoionization. Lastly, we point out that we have not considered planet-induced radio emission from the star, which might add to the total radio power of the observed system, though emission at a di ff erent orbital phase and likely di ff erent frequencies can be expected.  

> Acknowledgements. This publication is part of the project VI.C.232.041 (under research programme Talent Programme Vici), which are financed by the Dutch Research Council (NWO). This project has received funding from the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme (grant agreement No 817540, ASTROFLOW). This work used the Dutch national Supercomputer Snellius with the support of the SURF Cooperative using grant no. EINF-14106.

References 

> Akasofu, S.-I. 1981, Space Sci. Rev., 28, 121 Badman, S. T., Stevens, M. L., Bale, S. D., et al. 2025, ApJ, 995, L37 Bagenal, F. 2013, in Planets, Stars and Stellar Systems. Volume 3: Solar and Stel-lar Planetary Systems, ed. T. D. Oswalt, L. M. French, & P. Kalas (Springer Dordrecht), 251 Bastian, T. S., Dulk, G. A., & Leblanc, Y. 2000, ApJ, 545, 1058 Bastian, T. S., Villadsen, J., Maps, A., Hallinan, G., & Beasley, A. J. 2018, ApJ, 857, 133 Burkhart, B. & Loeb, A. 2017, ApJ, 849, L10 Callingham, J. R., Pope, B. J. S., Kavanagh, R. D., et al. 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 1359 Carolan, S., Vidotto, A. A., Hazra, G., Villarreal D’Angelo, C., & Kubyshkina, D. 2021, MNRAS, 508, 6001 Cordun, C. M., Vedantham, H. K., Brentjens, M. A., & van der Tak, F. F. S. 2025, A&A, 693, A162 Cranmer, S. R., Chhiber, R., Gilly, C. R., et al. 2023, Sol. Phys., 298, 126 Daley-Yates, S. & Stevens, I. R. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 1194 de Gasperin, F., Lazio, T. J. W., & Knapp, M. 2020, A&A, 644, A157 Dedner, A., Kemm, F., Kröner, D., et al. 2002, JCP, 175, 645 Donati, J.-F., Semel, M., Carter, B. D., Rees, D. E., & Collier Cameron, A. 1997, MNRAS, 291, 658 Elekes, F. & Saur, J. 2023, A&A, 671, A133 Elekes, F., Saur, J., & Grayver, A. 2025, A&A, 700, A225 Evensberget, D., Vidotto, A. A., Elekes, F., Je ff ers, S. V., & Luisman, R. T. 2026, MNRAS, 546, staf2070

Article number, page 12 of 16 Elekes & Vidotto: The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime 

Farrell, W. M., Desch, M. D., Lazio, T. J., Bastian, T., & Zarka, P. 2003, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 294, Scientific Frontiers in Research on Extrasolar Planets, ed. D. Deming & S. Seager, 151– 156 Farrell, W. M., Desch, M. D., & Zarka, P. 1999, J. Geophys. Res., 104, 14025 Franklin, K. L. & Burke, B. F. 1958, J. Geophys. Res., 63, 807 Griessmeier, J.-M. 2017, in Planetary Radio Emissions VIII, ed. G. Fischer, G. Mann, M. Panchenko, & P. Zarka, 285–299 Grießmeier, J.-M., Zarka, P., & Spreeuw, H. 2007, A&A, 475, 359 Hallinan, G., Sirothia, S. K., Antonova, A., et al. 2013, ApJ, 762, 34 Heays, A. N., Bosman, A. D., & van Dishoeck, E. F. 2017, A&A, 602, A105 Hess, S. L. G. & Zarka, P. 2011, A&A, 531, A29 Jardine, M. & Collier Cameron, A. 2008, A&A, 490, 843 Je ff ers, S. V., Mengel, M., Moutou, C., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 479, 5266 Johnstone, C. P., Güdel, M., Brott, I., & Lüftinger, T. 2015a, A&A, 577, A28 Johnstone, C. P., Güdel, M., Lammer, H., & Kislyakova, K. G. 2018, A&A, 617, A107 Johnstone, C. P., Güdel, M., Lüftinger, T., Toth, G., & Brott, I. 2015b, A&A, 577, A27 Kasper, J. C., Klein, K. G., Lichko, E., et al. 2021, Phys. Rev. Lett., 127, 255101 Kavanagh, R. D. & Vedantham, H. K. 2023, MNRAS, 524, 6267 Kavanagh, R. D., Vedantham, H. K., Rose, K., & Bloot, S. 2024, A&A, 692, A66 Keiling, A., Wygant, J. R., Cattell, C. A., Mozer, F. S., & Russell, C. T. 2003, Science, 299, 383 Keppens, R. & Goedbloed, J. P. 1999, A&A, 343, 251 Koskinen, T. T., Cho, J. Y. K., Achilleos, N., & Aylward, A. D. 2010, ApJ, 722, 178 Lammer, H., Selsis, F., Ribas, I., et al. 2003, ApJ, 598, L121 Lamy, L., Cecconi, B., Zarka, P., et al. 2011, Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 116, A04212 Lamy, L., Zarka, P., Cecconi, B., et al. 2018, Science, 362, aat2027 Lazio, W., T. J., Farrell, W. M., Dietrick, J., et al. 2004, ApJ, 612, 511 Lazio, T. J. W. & Farrell, W. M. 2007, ApJ, 668, 1182 Lynch, C. R., Murphy, T., Kaplan, D. L., Ireland, M., & Bell, M. E. 2017, MN-RAS, 467, 3447 Lynch, C. R., Murphy, T., Lenc, E., & Kaplan, D. L. 2018, MNRAS, 478, 1763 Mignone, A., Bodo, G., Massaglia, S., et al. 2007, ApJS, 170, 228 Mignone, A., Tzeferacos, P., & Bodo, G. 2010, JCP, 229, 5896 Murphy, T., Bell, M. E., Kaplan, D. L., et al. 2015, MNRAS, 446, 2560 Nichols, J. D. 2011, MNRAS, 414, 2125 Nichols, J. D. & Milan, S. E. 2016, MNRAS, 461, 2353 Paul, A. & Strugarek, A. 2026, A&A, 705, A12 Ribas, I., Guinan, E. F., Güdel, M., & Audard, M. 2005, ApJ, 622, 680 Sanz-Forcada, J., Micela, G., Ribas, I., et al. 2011, A&A, 532, A6 Saur, J., Grambusch, T., Duling, S., Neubauer, F. M., & Simon, S. 2013, A&A, 552, A119 Saur, J., Janser, S., Schreiner, A., et al. 2018, Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 123, 9560 See, V., Jardine, M., Fares, R., Donati, J.-F., & Moutou, C. 2015, MNRAS, 450, 4323 Semel, M. 1989, A&A, 225, 456 Stevens, I. R. 2005, MNRAS, 356, 1053 Storey, P. J. & Hummer, D. G. 1995, MNRAS, 272, 41 Strugarek, A., Brun, A. S., Matt, S. P., & Réville, V. 2015, ApJ, 815, 111 Treumann, R. A. 2006, A&A Rev., 13, 229 Turner, J. D., Grießmeier, J.-M., Zarka, P., Zhang, X., & Mauduit, E. 2024, A&A, 688, A66 Turner, J. D., Zarka, P., Grießmeier, J.-M., et al. 2021, A&A, 645, A59 Turner, J. D., Zarka, P., Grießmeier, J.-M., et al. 2023, in Planetary, Solar and He-liospheric Radio Emissions IX, ed. C. K. Louis, C. M. Jackman, G. Fischer, A. H. Sulaiman, & P. Zucca, 04048 Turnpenney, S., Nichols, J. D., Wynn, G. A., & Jia, X. 2020, MNRAS, 494, 5044 Vidotto, A. A., Fares, R., Jardine, M., et al. 2012, MNRAS, 423, 3285 Vidotto, A. A., Fares, R., Jardine, M., Moutou, C., & Donati, J.-F. 2015, MN-RAS, 449, 4117 Vidotto, A. A., Opher, M., Jatenco-Pereira, V., & Gombosi, T. I. 2009, ApJ, 699, 441 Voronov, G. S. 1997, Atomic Data and Nuclear Data Tables, 65, 1 Weber, C., Erkaev, N. V., Ivanov, V. A., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 480, 3680 Weber, C., Lammer, H., Shaikhislamov, I. F., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 469, 3505 Weber, E. J. & Davis, Jr., L. 1967, ApJ, 148, 217 Wilson, T. L., Rohlfs, K., & Hüttemeister, S. 2013, Tools of Radio Astronomy (Springer Berlin, Heidelberg) Winglee, R. M. & Dulk, G. A. 1986, ApJ, 307, 808 Winglee, R. M., Dulk, G. A., & Bastian, T. S. 1986, ApJ, 309, L59 Wu, S., Whiter, D. K., Lamy, L., et al. 2026, Science Advances, 12, eaec4114 Yantis, W. F., Sullivan, III, W. T., & Erickson, W. C. 1977, in Bulletin of the American Astronomical Society, Vol. 9, 453 Zarka, P. 1998, J. Geophys. Res., 103, 20159 Zarka, P. 2007, Planet. Space Sci., 55, 598 Zarka, P., Lazio, J., & Hallinan, G. 2015, in Advancing Astrophysics with the Square Kilometre Array (AASKA14), 120 Zarka, P., Marques, M. S., Louis, C., et al. 2018, A&A, 618, A84 Zhilkin, A. G. & Bisikalo, D. V. 2019, Astronomy Reports, 63, 550 

Article number, page 13 of 16 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv 

Appendix A: Structure of the stellar wind B1 B10 

> Alfvén radius

Fig. A.1: Stellar wind magnetic field ( B), velocity ( v), density (ρ), and pressure ( p) as a function of distance from the star ( x) for the solar wind (B1; top four panels ) and the more magnetic stel-lar wind model (B10; bottom four panels ). For the vector quanti-ties we show the magnitude (solid lines), radial ( r; dashed lines), and angular ( ϕ; dotted lines) components. The magnitude of the relative velocity ( v0) between the wind and a moving planet lo-cated at orbital distance x is shown as a thick solid gray line. Vertical lines indicate the Alfvén radius. Here we show the stellar wind properties up to 5 au, which are used as boundary conditions for the planetary MHD simula-tions. See Sect. 2.1 for a description of the wind model. Figure A.1.1 shows the steady-state solutions of the 1D MHD simu-lations with the B1 (solar wind) and B10 (enhanced magnetic field) models. 

> Article number, page 14 of 16 Elekes & Vidotto: The radio-magnetic scaling law in the sub-Alfvénic regime

# xzyvv orb v 0In fl ow Out fl ow Sub-solar point ϕ sOrbit Star Planet Orbital plane ϕθτBoundary 

Fig. B.1: Sketch illustrating the coordinate systems used for computations (spherical) and the presentation of results (Carte-sian). 

Appendix B: Coordinate system and geometrical definitions 

In Fig. B.1 we present a sketch demonstrating the geometrical basis of our simulation grid and computations. We assumed a Cartesian coordinate system in which the x-axis is aligned with the relative stellar wind velocity, v0. The relative velocity is com-posed of the wind velocity v and the planetary orbital velocity 

vorb . The z-axis is perpendicular to the orbital plane and paral-lel to the planetary magnetic moment. The y-axis completes the right-handed coordinate system. We solved the 3D MHD equa-tions in spherical coordinates, where the longitude Φ is measured counterclockwise from the y-axis. The colatitude is measured from the z-axis. The inflow boundary of the spherical simula-tion domain is defined with Φ ≤ 180 ◦. The downstream hemi-sphere is set as zero-gradient Neumann-type outflow boundary. The optical depth τ integration (Eq. 10) is performed along a line starting at the substellar point toward an arbitrary cell within the computational domain. The substellar point is o ff set from the negative x-axis by the angular di ff erence ΦS between the rela-tive velocity v0 and wind velocity vector v. For the presentation of results (Fig. 2), we transformed the spherical coordinates into Cartesian coordinates in post-processing. 

Appendix C: Effect of numerical diffusion on auroral energetics 

In this study a particularly di ff usive numerical scheme has been used (i.e., the minmod flux limiter and the hll Riemann solver) in order to achieve a faster and more robust numerical solution. Hence, the dissipated magnetic energy within the magnetosphere can be a ff ected by numerical di ff usion, which may in turn a ff ect the auroral Poynting fluxes. Here we present a brief compari-son between Poynting flux computations with our model (Sect. 2.2.1) and with a physically equivalent model based on less dif-minmod + hll 

> van Leer + hlld
> 0.03 au / B1

Fig. C.1: Poynting flux maps similar to Fig. 6 (top-left panel) for the original numerical scheme used in this study (the hll Rie-mann solver and the minmod flux limiter; top ) and a less dif-fusive scheme (hlld Riemann solver and Van Leer flux limiter; 

bottom ). The maps correspond to the 0 .03 au model with the B1 solar wind model. fusive numerical schemes. Instead of the minmod flux limiter, we utilized the van Leer algorithm. The Riemann problem was solved using the low-dissipation Harten-Lax-Van Leer disconti-nuities (hlld) scheme instead of the more di ff usive Harten-Lax-Van Leer (hll) scheme. In Fig. C.1 we show a comparison of the Poynting flux maps similar to Fig. 6 for the B1 solar wind model at 0 .03 au, obtained with the more and less di ff usive schemes. We find that the global structure of the Poynting fluxes is conserved between the two simulations. With the less dissipa-tive scheme, however, more small-scale details of the Poynting flux and fg/ fp ratio are resolved. Furthermore, steeper gradients in Poynting flux and fg/ fp can be found, as is expected from a less di ff usive numerical scheme. The most important features in the Poynting flux maps, i.e., the north-south and upstream-downstream asymmetries in Poynting flux and the auroral ovals tied to the OCFB are largely conserved. With the less di ff usive scheme, narrow regions at the upstream hemisphere now show 

fg/ fp > 1 although they do not contribute significantly to the energetics. We performed the Poynting flux integrations (Eq. 15) with the less di ff use model. The integrated auroral Poynt-ing flux without taking the fg/ fp ratio into account amounts to 1.26 ×10 17 W and 1 .47 ×10 17 W for the original and less di ff usive scheme, respectively. Taking the fg/ fp ratio into account the in-tegrations yield powers of 2 .5×10 16 W and 3 .81 ×10 16 W with the original and less di ff usive scheme, respectively. The lesser di ff u-sive schemes thus result in slightly enhanced integrated Poynting fluxes by a factor of ≈ 1.16 (without fg/ fp constraint) and ≈ 1.5(with fg/ fp constraint). In summary, we conclude that the integrated Poynting fluxes are only slightly a ff ected by the choice of the numerical scheme, and we consider our results robust to the numerical details. How-ever, for a study dedicated to atmospheric escape and its detailed eff ects on auroral energetics, we deem the less di ff use scheme preferable due to the better resolved ionospheric plasma density. 

> Article number, page 15 of 16

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aa60248-26corr_arxiv B1 B10 

> Alfvén radius Solar system planets 1au 0.7au 0.4au 0.2au 0.03au 0.1au 0.03au 0.2au 0.07au

Fig. D.1: Transfer function ( T ) as a function of the stellar wind energy partition ( PB/Pkin ) for the B1 ( top ) and B10 ( bottom )stellar wind scenarios. Selected data points have labels indicat-ing the orbital distance of the respective planet. In the top panel, the data point labeled 0.2 au is plotted separately due to the ex-ceptionally low T and low PB/Pkin caused by the proximity to the stellar wind corotation radius. The vertical dashed line indi-cates the Alfvén radius in the stellar frame of reference. 

Appendix D: Transfer function and stellar wind energy partition 

In this section we show the behavior of the transfer function ( T )as a function of stellar wind energy partition ( PB/Pkin ) supple-mentary to the transfer function plot in Fig. 5. In Fig. D.1 the dif-ferent regimes of the wind can be examined and how the respec-tive energy partition influences the transfer function. In the solar wind (B1), the transfer functions amounts to 0 .1 - 0 .3 from 0 .1 au down to 0 .03 au. In the super-Alfvénic wind regime, the transfer function drops monotonically to 0 .05 at 1 au and it is expected to drop further at larger distances. In the more magnetic wind (B10), the transfer function quickly drops from 0 .3 at 0 .03 au down to 0 .01 at 0 .1 au. At larger distances the transfer function drops 0 .06 and it is expected to drop further, although the curve suggests the transfer function to asymptotically approach some effi ciency about 10 −3.

Article number, page 16 of 16