Title: Joinings in Markov categories

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.10912v1

Published Time: Fri, 11 Sep 2026 00:30:01 GMT

Number of Pages: 51

Markdown Content:
> arXiv:2609.10912v1 [math.CT] 9 Sep 2026

# Joinings in Markov categories 

## Suddhasattwa Das ∗, Tomoharu Suda †‡ 

## September 11, 2026 

Abstract 

Dynamical systems theory primarily concerns the study of different forms of invariance, such as invariant sets, densities, measures, and observables. Ergodic systems are a special class of dynamical systems which are measure theoretically irreducible. In spite of this specialized property they dominate most discussions on ergodic theory because of the ergodic decomposition theorem. The viewpoint that any dynamical system is a composite of multiple ergodic components enables us to partition the face space into the basins of the different measures. The coexistence and mutual connections between these various coexisting subsystems are illuminated very effectively using the language of Category theory (CT). Some recent advancements have shown how the essence of measure theoretic dynamical systems can be captured through the formalism of Markov categories. This formalism captures the essential features of invariance and ergodicity through the language of limits and colimits. This article continues that formalism by studying the concept of joins using the language of spans and push-outs. A classical result is re-proven which establishes the connection between joins, ergodicity and mixing. In the process, the categorical language is refined to capture the notion of sub sigma-algebras and their invariance.   

> Key words. Semi-conjugacy, ergodic, join, functor, pushout, span, Markov
> AMS subject classifications. 18D25, 18A40, 37M99, 18F60, 37M22, 18A32, 18A25, 37M10

## 1 Introduction. 

There has been an increased interest (1; 2; 3, e.g.) in re-axiomatizating probability theory in the graphical language provided by string diagrams of monoidal categories. The motivation is that it allows traditional measure-theoretic probability to be a particular instance, while allowing many of the usual reasoning tech-niques of probability and statistics without being bound to the set-theoretic details of functions and sigma-algebras. The resulting analysis is known as categorical probability , and is mostly done in the setting of Markov categories. Categorical probability is an example of a synthetic theory, as opposed to analytic. The tools of reasoning and definitions are structural properties, rather than properties emerging from pointwise or formulaic definitions. Parallely a similar effort is underway in dynamical systems theory (4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9, e.g.) where different aspects of a dynamical system are chosen to be the primitive notion on which every other notion is built. There has been two distinct routes taken to this project. Works such as those based on uncountable measure theory (10; 11; 12) and connecting sets (4; 5, e.g.) continue to adhere to the classical approach of maps and spaces, but organize them in categories and functors. The other route, such as (13; 14; 15; 9) place the 

> ∗Department of Mathematics and Statistics, Texas Tech University, USA
> †Department of Applied Mathematics, Tokyo University of Science, Japan
> ‡RIKEN Center for Sustainable Resource Science, RIKEN, Japan

1analysis entirely in an abstract category. Concrete notions related to dynamics, such as invariance, orbits and semi-group actions are derived from strictly category theoretic axioms. This article continues the categorical study of ergodicity initiated in (14). Ergodicity essentially means that the system is irreducible. This irreducibility can be stated equivalently in terms of subsets or measure-ments. The categorical description replaces sets and measurements with cones and co-cones. The categorical or structural properties that enables these notions to play out, is that of a Markov category . The category 

Stoch of Markov kernels is the primary example of a Markov category. Several results of probability theory have recently been reproven in this way, for example, the Kolmogorov and Hewitt–Savage zero-one laws (16) and the de Finetti theorem (17). The main feature of Markov categories is that they simultaneously uphold both regular compositions of maps, and convex combinations of probability measures, as the composition rule innate to the category. The most important outcome of this feature is that the fundamental notions of disintegration of measures, and ergodic decomposition are ingrained naturally within the Markov category. Moreover, the usual tools of reasoning in probability, such as almost-sure equality and determinism also emerge as a consequence of the Markov structure. In the instance of Stoch , these notions take their usual meaning from classical probability. Our focus will be on the idea of joinings (18; 19; 20; 21, e.g.) in ergodic theory. joinings are a powerful tool used to study the relationships between different dynamical systems. Joinings are a precise way to quantify how much two dynamical systems overlap or interact. Formally, given two measure-preserving dynamical systems (X, ΣX , μ X , ΦtX ) and (Y, ΣY , μ Y , ΦtY ) , a joining of these two systems is a probability measure λ on the product space X × Y which is invariant under the product flow Φ tX × ΦtY , and whose marginal distributions on (X, ΣX ) and (Y, ΣY ) are μX and μY respectively. Joinings are thus the dynamics analog of optimal transport. Two dynamical systems may have an abundance of joinings, or just one. The simplest joining is the product measure μX × μY . This represents the case where the two systems co-exist completely independent of each other in the product space. The greatest insight that the theory of joinings provide is the idea of 

disjointness . Two systems are said to be disjoint if the only joining between them is their product join. This is a unique way of characterizing mutual differences. The difference appears as a lack of overlap. When the two systems X and Y are the same, their joinings are called self-joins . The study of self-joins reveal various internal structures of the system, such as the presence of symmetries and mixing properties. 

Outline. We begin by reviewing the formalism of Markov categories in Section 2. Next we introduce the notion of state preservation in the context of dynamical systems, in Section 3. The idea of ”joins” is introduced next in Section 4. Equipped with these notions, we present in Section 6 how the graphical calculus of Markov categories can be used to synthesize some core concepts of ergodic theory. Section 7 presents a topic of independent interest – the join diagrams may be composed, which enables Markov categories to be a category enriched over metric spaces. Section 8 Section 9 Section 10 Section 10 

## 2 Categorical formulation. 

We now begin by reviewing the axioms of a Markov category. The most basic property is : 

Assumption 1. There is a closed monoidal category X .

Assumption 1 is satisfied by some of the most commonly used categories : 2Interpretation in ergodic theory 1 

The prime example of a monoidal category is Set in which objects are sets up to a pre-fixed cardinality 

κ, and morphisms are maps between them. The Cartesian product of sets is a natural monoidal product, which also coincides with their categorical product. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 2 

The category Topo in which objects are topological spaces and morphisms are continuous maps is a monoidal category, with the monoidal product being the usual Cartesian product of topological spaces. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 3 

The category Meas in which objects are measurable spaces and morphisms are measurable maps is a monoidal category, with the monoidal product being the usual Cartesian product of topological spaces. Given two measurable spaces (X, ΣX ) and (Y, ΣY ) sigma-algebra assigned to X × Y is the minimal sigma algebra generated by rectangular set A × B where A is drawn from Σ X and B from ΣY .At this point we recall the notion of Cartesian categories, which are endowed with a natural monoidal product. 

Definition 1 (Cartesian categories) . A category equipped with finite categorical products is called a Carte-sian category. 

States. The main focus of this article is on states. The Markovian viewpoint allows us to interpret a state as both a particular choice of points from the set of points represented by the space, or as a distribution. 

Definition 2 (States / points) . Given any monoidal category C, a state or point of an object X of C is a morphism x ∶ 1 → X from the monoidal unit 1.

Interpretation in ergodic theory 4 

Categories such as Set , Meas and Topo are ”set-like” or more precisely, topologically concrete (8, see). This means that a state on a space X is just some choice of a point x on it. This is because in such categories, the collection of morphisms Hom (1; X) is in bijection with the set underlying the object X. In Stoch , morphisms μ ∶ 1 → Ω are in bijection with probability measures on the probability space Ω. 

Lemma 2.1. The pointed version of a monoidal category is also a monoidal category. In the original category is closed, then so is its pointed version. 

Lemma 2.1 is proved in Section C.1. In category theory, when we ”point” a category , we are usually looking at the category of objects under the terminal object, denoted 1 C . If C is already a closed monoidal category (like the category of sets, ), the pointed version [1C ; C] inherits a closed monoidal structure. The latter structure is usually a bit different from the original. he natural monoidal product in [1 ; C] 

is the smash product ∧. For two pointed objects (X, x 0) and (Y, y 0), the smash product is the pullback 3(X, x 0) ∧ ( Y, y 0)(X, x 0) ∧ ( Y, y 0) X ⊗ { y0}∪{ x0} ⊗ Y X ⊗ Y

(1) 

Internal hom-objects. Assumption 1 enables many essential constructs of dynamical systems theory to be realized as objects of C. Pick an element Ω from C. An important object is Endo (Ω) ∶= [ Ω ; Ω ]int , (2) the endomorphism object associated to domain Ω. It allows the collection of self maps of Ω to be interpreted as an object in C. Another important consequence is the creation of an object Path (Ω) ∶= [ T ; Ω ]int , (3) which we interpret as the path-space of T -indexed paths in domain Ω. It is the collection of all possible 

orbit -s on the domain Ω, not limited to those generated by the dynamics of F . Due to Assumption 1, this collection is also of the same type / category as objects in C. It is alternatively known as the space of 

sample-paths and is a fundamental object of study in the theory of stochastic processes (22, e.g.). 

Definition 3 (Markov category) . (2, Def 2.1) A symmetric monoidal category C is said to be a Markov category if for every object x ∈ C , there are the following morphisms 

copy x ∶ x → x ⊗ x, del x ∶ x → 1C ,

satisfying the following coherence conditions : 

x ⊗ x ⊗ xx ⊗ x x x ⊗ x ⊗ xx ⊗ x ⊗ x    

> ≅
> Id x⊗copy x
> copy x⊗Id x
> copy x
> ≅

;

x x ⊗ xx ⊗ x x    

> =copy x
> copy x
> Id x⊗del x
> del x⊗Id x

; (4) 1C 1C ⊗ 1C

x ⊗ y   

> ≅
> del x⊗ydel x⊗del y

;

x x ⊗ xx ⊗ x

> copy x
> copy x
> swap x,x

(5) and any morphism f satisfies – 

x ⊗ yx ⊗ x ⊗ y ⊗ y x ⊗ x ⊗ y ⊗ y 

> (copy x)⊗( copy y)
> copy x⊗y
> symm
> ≅

;1C

x y 

> del x
> f
> del y

(6) 4Interpretation in ergodic theory 5 

Every category equipped with finite categorical products and a terminal object are also inherently Markov categories. This means that the categories Set , Topo and Meas previously discussed are also Markov categories. The deletion morphisms can be used to create a natural notion of projections from monoidal products : 

B A ⊗ B A

1 ⊗ B A ⊗ 1   

> A⊗del B
> π1
> del A⊗Bπ2
> ≅≅

(7) One can similarly have coordinate-wise projections for any finite product. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 6 

The most important example of a non-Cartesian Markov category is Stoch . Here the objects are measurable spaces, and morphisms are Markov kernels. More precisely, given two measurable spaces 

(X, ΣX ) and (Y, ΣY ) a Markov kernel from the former to the latter is a map f ∶ X → Prob (Y ; Σ Y )

where Prob (Y ; Σ Y ) is the collection of Σ Y -measurable probability measures on Y . The map must satisfy 

∀A ∈ ΣY , X ↦ f (⋅)( A) is Σ X − measurable .

The composition rule is given as follows 

(X, ΣX ) (Y, ΣY )(Z, ΣZ ) 

> g○ffg

∶= (g ○ f )( x)( C)=∫Y g(y)( C)df (x)( y)

, { ∀x ∈ X

∀C ∈ ΣZ

The composition rule for Markov kernels is thus a convolution of kernels. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 7 

Any measurable map f ∶ ( X, ΣX ) → ( Y, ΣY ) between measurable spaces is also a Markov kernel, assigning to each point x in X the point-measure δf (x). Note how the convolution of such point-mass kernels correspond exactly to the usual composition of maps. This indicates that an easy and important instance of Assumption 2 is when X = Meas , Y = Stoch and the functor ι is just the inclusion. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 8 

The notion of a pushforward of a measure is encoded within the composition rules of Stoch . Ameasure is a morphism μ ∶ 1 → X, and a deterministic measurable map f ∶ X → Y is a also a morphism in Stoch . Their convolution f ○ μ can be easily verified to be the pushforward measure 

(f∗μ)( A) ∶= μ (f −1(A)) .

5Interpretation in ergodic theory 9 

In any Cartesian category C the copy morphism is the diagonal morphism which originates naturally from the product structure. Let an object X of C be fixed. Then the copy morphism is the unique dotted morphism shown below which enables the commutation : 

XX X × X X

> Id Id proj 2proj 1

The copy morphism copy X in this case is also denoted as ⟨Id X , Id X ⟩.

## 3 State preservation. 

A dynamical system can be succinctly described as follows : 

Definition 4 (Dynamical system) . A dynamical system with context C and time structure T is a functor 

Φ ∶ T → C . The image under Φ of the unique object of T is called the domain of the dynamics. 

Almost all theoretical considerations of a dynamical system involves some notion of invariance or the other. Invariance takes a particularly simple and graphical format in a categorical description. 

Definition 5 (Invariant object) . An invariant object of the dynamics Φ ∶ T → C is a cone above the functor 

Φ. This means an arrow h ∶ A → Ω such that the following commutations hold : 

A

Ω Ω 

> hh
> Φt

, ∀t ∈ T .

The C-object A here is called the apex of this cone. 

Definition 6 (Invariant state) . An invariant state of the dynamics Φ ∶ T → C is an invariant object whose apex is the unit object 1. Equivalently this it is cone above the functor Φ with apex 1. This means an arrow 

h ∶ 1 → Ω such that the following commutations hold : 

1Ω Ω 

> hh
> Φt

, ∀t ∈ T .

Definition 7 (Invariant measurement) . An invariant measurement of the dynamics Φ ∶ T → C is a co-cone below the functor Φ. This means an arrow h ∶ Ω → A such that the following commutations hold : 

Ω Ω

A

> h
> Φt
> h

, ∀t ∈ T .

The C-object A here is called the bottom of this cone. 

6Interpretation in ergodic theory 10 

A dynamical system in Meas is simply a choice of a domain Ω, along with a collection of measurable maps {Φt ∶ Ω → Ω ∶ t ∈ T } . An invariant object A as in Definition 5 is some measurable space A along with a measurable map h ∶ A → Ω which remains invariant under the action of Φ. Note that this means that the sub-object of Ω created by the image h(A) is an invariant, measurable subset of Ω. Invariant states and observations carry a similar interpretation. 

State preservation. Although the nature of a dynamical system to preserve a given state, or conversely, for a state to be invariant under a given dynamical system, are both aspects of invariance. However we place this in a slightly more elaborate context. 

Assumption 2. There is a Markov category Y, and a monoidal functor ι ∶ X → Y .

Assumption 2 allows us to start with a dynamical system in the category X , transfer it to Y via the functor ι, and then look for invariance in this new category Y. Suppose that the category Y has a richer structure than X . This would mean that Y offers a broader context than X . Then Assumption 2 provides us the option to consider dynamical systems which are structurally limited to the category X but look for invariance in the broader context of Y. We formalize this via a category StPrsrv as follows : 

Definition 8 (Multiple context state preservation) . Given Assumptions and 2, the category StPrsrv of state preserving systems is the comma category shown below : 

StPrsrv ∶= StPrsrv (ι) ∶= ⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⋆ F (T ; X ) 

F (T ; Y) F (T ; X )   

> ∆T,Y(1)⊂
> ι○

⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

This means that the objects are as follows : 

ob (StPrsrv ) = {( μ, Φ) ∶ Functor Φ ∶ T → X ,

invariant state μ of ι ○ Φ in Y }

and a morphism h between two objects (μ, Φ) and (μ′, Φ′) satisfies the conditions given below : 

(μ, Φ)(μ′, Φ′) 

> h

∈ StPrsrv ⇒

ιΩ

ιΩ′ 

> h

∶

1 ιΩ

ιΩ′  

> μμ′h

;

ιΩ ιΩ

ιΩ′ ιΩ′

> hι○Φt
> hι○Φ′t

Observe that in the defining conditions, the morphisms all reside in Y, and involve the images ιΩ, ιΩ′

of the X -objects Ω, Ω ′.

Interpretation in ergodic theory 11 

The prime instance of Assumptions and 2 which motivates our categorification is when X = Meas 

and Y = Stoch . In this case, the category StPrsrv can be represented as a triple (Ω, μ, Φ) where Ω is a measurable space, μ a probability measure on Ω and Φ is a measurable dynamical system on Ω which preserves μ. A morphism h as in Definition 8 is a measurable semi-conjugacy h ∶ Ω → Ω′

between the dynamics Φ and Φ ′, which also pushes the invariant measure μ forward into μ′.7Since the category StPrsrv is created as a comma category, it naturally encodes within it the information about the underlying dynamical system, choice of invariant state, and the domain. This is captured in the following commutation diagram : StPrsrv F (T ; X ) [1 ; Y] Y X 

> Frgt 2
> Frgt 3dom Frgt 2
> ι

(8) The morphisms Frgt 2 and Frgt 3 emerging from StPrsrv formalize the fact that state-preserving systems have to ingredients – an dynamical systems object from F (T ; X ) and an arrow Y from 1, which is an object of the slice category [1 ; Y] . The commutation in Diagram (8) states that the co-domain of this arrow, and the state-space of the dynamics must be the same. Our definition of the category StPrsrv of state-preserving dynamics involves the following choices in the given order – firstly a dynamical system Φ in context-X with domain Ω; and secondly a state μ ∶ 1 → ιΩwhich remains invariant under Φ. This definition thus first specifies the dynamics and then a state invariant under the dynamics. One could have alternatively first specified a domain and a state, and then look for dynamics on that domain which preserve that state. We shall see that these two definitions are categorically equivalent. We need to establish certain useful rules of graphical calculus for Markov categories. 

Copied products. One of the utilities of the copy feature of Markov categories is that any finite collection of morphisms with a common domain may be bunched together to produce a joint-morphism : 

⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

XYnfn n = 1, . . . N 

⎫⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭⇒

X

⊗Nn=1X ⊗Nn=1Yn   

> copy (N)⊗N, copy
> n=1fn
> ⊗Nn=1fn

Note that the morphism ⊗Nn=1fn is a parallel grouping of the morphisms, and has domain ⊗Nn=1X which is the N -fold tensor product of X. On the other hand the morphism ⊗N, copy  

> n=1

fn has domain X. It represents a unified morphism in which each of the individual fn-morphisms remain embedded. Recall the notion of projections from (7). It follows from the Markov identities (4) that coordinate wise projection of a copied product recovers the individual components 

⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

XYnfn n = 1, . . . N 

⎫⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭⇒

X Yi

⊗Nn=1X ⊗Nn=1Yn    

> copy (N)⊗N, copy
> n=1fn
> fi
> ⊗Nn=1fn
> πi

, ∀i ∈ 1, . . . , N. (9) 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 12 

In any Cartesian category such as Set , Topo and Meas , the copied product is simply the categorical product of the morphisms. 8Interpretation in ergodic theory 13 

The copied product ⊗N, copy  

> n=1

fn in Stoch represent the joint distribution on the domain ⊗Nn=1Yn induced by the Markov kernels fn. More importantly, the kernels fn are present independently within the morphism ⊗Nn=1fn while they are jointly distributed within ⊗N, copy  

> n=1

fn.

Definition 9 (Specially pointed objects) . The comma category 

[1 ; ι] ∶= ⎡⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⋆ XY 

> 1ι

⎤⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

is called the category of specially pointed objects . The objects are pairs of the form (x, X ) where X is some X -object and X ∶ 1 → ιx is a Y morphism. X is interpreted as a space, and x as a state within X

interpreted in the context of Y. A morphism from an object (x, X ) to an object (x′, X ′) is some X -morphism 

ϕ ∶ X → X′ such that x′ = ιϕ ○ x.

In any category, Markov or not, the objects are interpreted as spaces on domains to host a dynamical system. The idea of pointed categories allows us to treat a pair (μ, Ω) jointly as an object or domain that may host a dynamical system. One of the most important realizations for us is the fact that such pointed categories are also Markovian : 

Theorem 1 (Pointed version of Markov category is Markov) . The pointed version of a Markov category is a Markov category. The copy morphism is given by the copied product : 

1

X 

> x
> copy

1 XX ⊗ X 

> x
> copy x
> copy X

(10) 

The deletion morphism is given by 

1

X 

> xdelete

1 X

1  

> x
> ≅del X

(11) 

Moreover, this Markov structure is inherited by the slice category [1 ; ι] of specially pointed objects (Defini-tion 9). 

Since Lemma 2.1 already establishes the monoidal properties of the pointed version, one only needs to verify the rules (4)–(6) of copy and deletion are satisfied. Theorem 1 is proved in Section B.2. 

Theorem 2 (Equivalence of cones and state preservation) . The category StPrsrv has two equivalent defi-nitions : (i) the category F (T ; [1 ; ι]) of dynamical systems on specially pointed objects; (ii) Y-cones with apex 1 on dynamical systems in X , as presented in Definition 8. 

Theorem 2 is proved in Section B.3. 94 Joins. 

We can at last define a join in the context of state-preserving dynamics. A join is basically a diagram commonly known as a span (23; 24; 25) in category theory. Given an ordered pair of objects x, y of a category C, a span is any diagram of the form 

zx z

involving two morphisms to x, y from a common third object z. When the category is StPrsrv, such a diagram can be meaningfully expressed as shown on the left below :      

> (Ω, μ, Φ)(Ω1, μ 1,Φ1)(Ω2, μ 2,Φ2)
> h2h1Frgt 2

(Ω, Φ)(Ω1, Φ1) (Ω2, Φ2)

> Frgt 2(h2)Frgt 2(h1)

The diagram on the left exists in Y. Applying the forgetful functor Frgt 2 from (8) we get the X -diagram on the right. This span will be called a join of the two state-preserving systems (μ1, Φ1) and (μ2, Φ2) if the apex of the diagram on the right is the tensor product of the two constituent systems. In other words the following two conditions are satisfied.      

> (Ω, μ, Φ)(Ω1, μ 1,Φ1)(Ω2, μ 2,Φ2)
> h2h1

;     

> (ιΩ, ι Φ)(ιΩ1, ι Φ1)(ιΩ2, ι Φ2)(ιΩ1⊗ιΩ2, ι Φ1⊗ιΦ2)
> ≅
> Frgt 2(h2)Frgt 2(h1)
> π2π1

(12) 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 14 

In ergodic theory, a joinings is simply a probability measures on the product space Ω 1 ⊗ Ω2 which is invariant under the product dynamics and whose two marginals are μ1 and μ2 respectively. Ergodic theory is about the spectral or functional properties of invariant measures, and the collection of joinings between two measure preserving systems encodes both the independence and structural alignment between them. By analyzing the space of invariant couplings between two measure-preserving transformations, joining theory allows ergodic theorists to define fundamental dynamical properties: two systems are disjoint if their only joining is the independent product measure, signaling that they share no non-trivial factors or structural similarities. Beyond establishing spectral and factor-independent boundaries, joinings provide the foundational language for the Furstenberg–Zimmer structure theory (decomposing systems into rigid and weakly mixing components) and play a vital role in proving non-conventional ergodic theorems, solving isomorphism problems, and uncovering rigidity phenomena in structural dynamics. 

Construction of joinings. Any two StPrsrv-objects have a trivial joining, which is the monoidal product of the two states. In the context of ergodic theory, they play the role of independent coupling of two dynamical systems. Of more interest are the non-trivial joinings that may exist. We shall review a few 10 diagrammatic means of constructing joinings. 

Definition 10 (Graphs) . Given any morphism f as shown below on the left : 

xy 

> f

⇒

x x ⊗ xx ⊗ y  

> graph (f)
> copy x
> x⊗f

(13) 

its graph is the composite morphism shown above on the right, created with the aid of the copy morphism. 

Definition 11 (Graph-joinings) . (20, Eqn 1) 

ιΩ2

1 ιΩ1 ιΩ1 ⊗ ιΩ2

ιΩ1

> hμ 1=μ2
> μ1
> μ1
> h
> =
> graph (h)
> π1
> π2

(14) Diagrammatically, this join λh is given by 1X hμ

A graph joining is an example of the application of graphical calculus, in which a simple diagram, namely a morphism h in StPrsrv is used to create a more intricate diagram in Y. To establish this diagram to be a joining, we need a further property called determinism .

Determinism. In a Markov category, a morphism f ∶ X → Y (which generally represents a stochastic or probabilistic process) is interpreted as deterministic if it perfectly preserves the ”copy” operation. If 

f contains any randomness (like flipping a coin), running it independently on two identical inputs will generally yield different results. Therefore, the only way the two sides can be equal is if the process f has no internal randomness at all—meaning it evaluates to the exact same output every single time. Formally this means : 

Definition 12 (Deterministic) . A morphism x f

Ð→ y is said to be deterministic if the following commutations hold : 

x x ⊗ xy y ⊗ y 

> f
> copy x
> f⊗f
> copy y

(15) This essentially means that the transition under f after copying, is equivalent to copying after the transition of f . We therefore assume : 11 Assumption 3 (Determinism) . The images of morphisms under ι from Assumption 2 are deterministic in 

Y.

Interpretation in ergodic theory 15 

In Stoch where determinism carries its usual meaning, the diagram (15) asserts that evaluating a deterministic process once and duplicating its output yields the exact same outcome as duplicating the input first and applying the process twice independently on both copies. Stochastic morphisms, i.e. proper Markov kernels fail to commute with copy because running a probabilistic process twice produces independent random outcomes rather than identical duplicates, deterministic maps preserve information perfectly and respect non-linear copying. 

Lemma 4.1. Suppose Assumptions 2 and 3 hold. Given an StPrsrv -morphism h ∶ ( Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) → ( Ω2, μ 2, Φ2),the state graph (h)μ1 constructed in (14) above creates a joint state for μ1, μ 2.

Lemma 4.1 is proved in Section B.1. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 16 

In ergodic theory, the graph joining induced by a semiconjugacy (or factor map) h ∶ ( Ω1, μ 1, Φt

> 1

) → (Ω2, μ 2, Φt

> 2

) is the unique invariant probability measure μh on the product space Ω 1 × Ω2 supported entirely on the graph of h, explicitly defined by μh(A × B) = μ1(A ∩ h−1(B)) . By concentrating all probability mass on the subset {( x, h (x)) ∣ x ∈ Ω1}, the graph joining acts as a maximally rigid, deterministic coupling where the trajectory in the factor space is entirely subordinate to the state of the extension—a stark contrast to the independent product measure that defines disjointness. Analytically, these deterministic joinings manifest as extreme points in the weakly compact, convex simplex of all joinings between the two systems, serving as the foundational building blocks for defining relatively independent joinings over common factors. A special case of graph joining are obtained when the morphism ϕ shown above is just an iteration of the flow Φ T :

Definition 13 (Off-diagonal joinings) . (26, Sec 6.1) The join obtained by replacing (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1), (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2)

with (Ω, μ, Φ) in (14) and h with ΦT and : 

ιΩ1 ιΩ ιΩ ⊗ ιΩ

ιΩ1ΦT μ=μμ1 

> μ
> ΦT
> =
> graph (ΦT)
> π1
> π2

(16) 

is called the off-diagonal joining at time T .

Off-diagonal joinings are obviously self-joinings. 

Almost sure equality. This essential notion was well adapted within the framework of Markov categories by Cho and Jacobs (1, Def 5.1). In a Markov category, the concept of ”almost everywhere” (or ”almost surely”) is always defined relative to a specific prior state (a probability distribution) and is formalized by comparing joint distributions. Because Markov categories generally lack underlying sets, you cannot define 12 ”almost everywhere” by looking at sets of measure zero. Instead, you look at whether differences between two processes are ”visible” to a given prior. 

Definition 14 (Almost sure equality) . Suppose C is a Markov category. Given a morphism p ∶ Θ → X, two morphisms f, g ∶ X → Y are said to be p-almost surely equal if 

graph (f ) ○ p = graph (g) ○ p. 

Thus the morphisms may not be equal, but when considered jointly with their domain, they are equalized by the state p. This can be restated through the following commutation diagram : graph (f ) ○ p

=

graph (g) ○ p

⇔

X ⊗ YX ⊗ Y Θ X X ⊗ XX ⊗ Y 

> ≅≅
> p
> graph (f)
> graph (g)
> copy X
> X⊗fX⊗g

(17) 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 17 

In the context of Stoch , diagram (17) implies that for any measurable sets A ⊂ X and B ⊂ Y , and every point θ ∈ Θ, 

p (θ, A ∩ f −1(B)) = p (θ, A ∩ g−1(B)) .

Disintegration of measures. In a Markov category, disintegration is the formal, categorical abstraction of conditional probability. It describes how a joint process can be factored into a marginal process and a conditional process. The notion of disintegration to be used is an abstraction of the rule P (X, Y ) = 

P (Y ∣X)P (X).

Definition 15 (Disintegration of a morphism) . Suppose there is a composable sequence of morphisms 

p ∶ A → X and f ∶ X → Y . Then a disintegration of f along p is a factorization of the morphism graph (f )○ p

via f ○ p. More precisely it is a morphism s ∶ Y ⊗ A → X which satisfies the commutation shown below on the right. 

∀

AXY

> pf

∶ ∃ 

A ⊗ YX 

> s

∶

A X X ⊗ YA ⊗ Y A ⊗ Y ⊗ Y   

> graph (f○p)
> pgraph (f)
> A⊗copy Y
> s⊗Y

(18) When the object A = 1, so that p is just a state in X, (18) has a more specific and significant meaning : 

Definition 16 (Disintegration of a morphism along a state) . Suppose there is a composable sequence of morphisms p ∶ 1 → X and f ∶ X → Y . Then a disintegration of f along p is a factorization of the morphism graph (f ) ○ p via graph (f ○ p). More precisely it is a morphism (f −1∣p) ∶ Y → X which satisfies 

13 the commutation shown below on the right. 

∀

1

XY

> pf

∶ ∃ 

YX  

> (f−1∣p)

∶

X X ⊗ Y

1

Y Y ⊗ Y      

> graph (f)
> f○pp
> graph T(f−1∣p)
> copy Y
> (f−1∣p)⊗ Y

(19) Thus, a disintegration of a morphism f along a state p of its domain means the following isomorphism : 

[graph T (f −1∣p) ○ f ] ○ p = [ graph (f )] ○ p. (20) Thus from the perspective of p, graph T (f −1∣p) ○ f is indistinguishable from graph (f ). In fact there is an inversion lurking within this relation. We make a note here that 

Lemma 4.2 (Disintegration as inversion) . Suppose Assumption 3 holds, then disintegration along a de-terministic map is inversion almost surely. More precisely let p ∶ 1 → X be a state and f ∶ X → Y is deterministic. Then the disintegration (f −1∣p) ∶ Y → X is the unique morphism such that 

f ○ ( f −1∣p) = Id Y , f p − almost surely . (21) We shall find such immense use of the commutation (19), so we assume 

Assumption 4. The category Y from Assumptions 2 allows disintegrations of morphisms along states. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 18 

In the context of Stoch , disintegration corresponds to the usual notion of disintegration of measures along the fibres of a measurable transformation. Given a measure p and a measurable transformation 

f ∶ X → Y , for f∗p-almost every y ∈ Y , there is a probability measure py supported on the inverse image f −1(y) defined uniquely by this weak characterization : 

∫x∈X

ϕdp = ∫ y∈Y ∫x∈f −1(y)

ϕ(x)dp y(x), ∀ϕ ∈ L∞(p).

The correspondence 

y ↦ δy ⊗ py

is precisely the Markov kernel (f −1∣p) ∶ Y → X ⊗ Y .

Lemma 4.3. Suppose Assumptions 2 and 4 hold. Consider a morphism h in [1 ; ι] as shown below on the left : 

(ΩX , μ X )(ΩY , μ Y ) 

> h

⇒

1ΩX

ΩX ⊗ ΩYμX

> λ
> graph (h)

⇒ ∃ 

ΩY

ΩXγ ∶ λ − a.e. ∶

ΩX ⊗ ΩY

ΩX ΩYπX πY

> γ

(22) 

Let λ be the resulting graph join, as shown above in the middle. Then there is a Y-morphism γ ∶ ΩX → ΩY

such that the left-most commutation holds λ.a.e.. 

14 Lemma 4.3 is proved in Section B.4. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 19 

Lemma 4.3 has a particularly important implication in the context of Stoch , called an intertwining 

Markov operator (20, Sec 1.3). The morphism γ from (22) is the Markov kernel given by 

γ ∶ ΩY → Prob (ΩX ), γ(y) ∶= γ∣y.

This results in an operator Φ λY →X ∶ L2(μX ) → L2(μY )(ΦλY →X ϕ) ( y) ∶= ∫ x∈ΩX

ϕ(x)dγ (y)( x) = ∫ ΩX

ϕ(x)d(λ∣y)( x),

which is also a Markov operator, meaning it preserves positivity and maps 1 to 1. This Markov operator may be defined equivalently by its dual action : 

⟨ϕ ⊗ 1ΩX , 1ΩY ⊗ ψ⟩L2(λ) = ∫ ΩX ×ΩY

ϕ(x)ψ(y)dλ (x, y ) = ∫ ΩY

[∫ ΩX

ϕ(x)d(λ∣y)( x)] ψ(y)dμ Y (y)= ∫ ΩY

(ΦλY →X ϕ) ( y)ψ(y)dμ Y (y)= ⟨ ΦλY →X ϕ, ψ ⟩L2(μY ) .

Lemma 4.4 (Non-trivial joinings) . Consider the following diagram 

1

X ⊗ YX Y 

> λπXπY
> γ

⇒

1

X ⊗ YX YZ 

> λπXπY
> γψ

(23) 

and the morphism γ guaranteed by Lemma 4.3. Then the state λ is non-trivial, i.e., is not the monoidal product of its X and Y marginals iff the morphism γ does not factor through 1. Moreover, there exists a unique (up to isomorphism) deterministic morphism ψ ∶ Y → Z as shown on the right, such that for any morphism ψ′ ∶ Y → Z′ such that ψ′ ○ γ is non-constant, ψ′ must factor through ψ.

1

⊗T X ⊗ Y X ⊗ YX Y Z

⊗T X   

> λλ∞
> π⊗TX
> πt
> πXπY
> γψγ∞
> πt

(24) 15 ⊗T X ⊗ Y

1 X ⊗ YX Y

⊗T X  

> πY
> π⊗TX
> λλT
> πYπX
> ιt⊗Yγιtγ∞

(25) 

⊗T X ⊗ Y

1 X ⊗ YX Y

⊗T X ⊗T X 

> πY
> π⊗TX
> λλT
> μX, T
> μX, T
> πYπX
> ιt⊗Yγιt
> shift
> γT

⊗T X ⊗ Y

1 X ⊗ YX Y

⊗T X Z 

> πY
> π⊗TX
> λλT
> πYπX
> ιt⊗Yγιt
> ψγ∞

Lemma 4.5. Suppose Assumptions 2 and 4 hold. Then a morphism between state-reserving dynamics can be inverted almost everywhere . More precisely, given an StPrsrv morphism as shown on the left : 

(ΩX , μ X , ΦX )(ΩY , μ Y , ΦY ) 

> h

⇒

ιΦY

ιΦX  

> (h−1∣μX)

⇔ ∀ t ∶ μY − a.s. ∶

ιΦY ιΦY

ιΦX ιΦX  

> (h−1∣μX)
> ιΦtY
> (h−1∣μX)
> ιΦtX

(26) 

the disintegration of h along μY serves as a natural transformation between the two dynamics. Equivalently, it implies the commutations μY -almost everywhere as shown on the right. 

Lemma 4.5 is proved in Section B.5. It relies on the observation that (20) yields graph T (h−1∣μX ) ○ μY = graph T (h−1∣μX ) ○ h ○ μX = graph (h) ○ μX . (27) 16 Interpretation in ergodic theory 20 

In the context of Stoch , Lemma 4.5 essentially states that a measure preserving change of variables can be inverted, after which it becomes a Markov kernel. The commutation in (26) essentially means that each fibre h−1(y) of the semi-conjugacy is invariant under the flow Φ t. Moreover, the conditional measures along these fibres are preserved under the flow, namely : 

(ΦtX )∗ (μX ∣ f −1(y)) = μX ∣ f −1(ΦtY y), ∀t ∈ T , μ Y − a.e. y ∈ T. 

## 5 Abstract probability spaces. 

An abstract probability space within a Markov category is realized not by an explicit measure space 

(X, Σ, μ ), but structurally as a point state morphism p ∶ 1 → X, where 1 is the monoidal unit object repre-senting the trivial scalar space. By abstracting the measure-theoretic foundations into the axiomatic proper-ties of semi-cartesian monoidal categories, this formulation models probability measures purely through their operational behavior, namely by defining states as morphisms and using the deletion morphism to satisfy the normalization condition. The study of abstract probability spaces (27) (28) (29) (30) within the framework of Markov categories has emerged as one of the most powerful structural approaches to probability the-ory, statistics, and information theory. By stripping away the point-set topological and measure-theoretic baggage, this approach distills stochastic behavior down to its pure compositional essence. Traditional measure-theoretic probability is highly expressive but often obscures the underlying algebra of information flow. Markov categories shift the focus from the objects (spaces and measurable sets) to the morphisms (stochastic processes, channels, and kernels) and how they compose. 

Assumption 5. Y is causal. 

Definition 17. (2, Def 13.8) Given a Markov category C having conditionals and the property of causality, one can form a category PS (C) in which objects are pointed objects 1 μ

Ð→ X, to be represented as (X, μ ). A morphism from (X, μ ) to another object (X′, μ ′) is a C-morphism f ∶ X → X′ such that f ○ μ = μ′ μ-a.s.. The composition of two morphisms is the usual composition inherited from C.

The framework seamlessly unifies discrete probability, continuous measure-theoretic probability, espe-cially when C = Stoch . Abstracting probability spaces allows one to bypass certain classical measure-theoretic pathologies like the non-existence of regular conditional probabilities in non-standard spaces. If a construction works in a well-behaved Markov category, the structure of the probability spaces allows easy extensions. At this point we make a basic observation : 

Lemma 5.1. (2, Def 13.8) If a Markov category C is causal and has conditionals, then (i) PS (C) inherits the symmetric monoidal structure from C.(ii) PS (C) is created from an equivalence relation on the pointed category [ι ; C] . There is a functor 

[ι ; C] → PS (C) ,

which is bijective on objects and surjective on hom-sets. 

Assumption 6. The category Y has pushouts. 

Given a category J, let 1 ⋆ J denote the category in which there is an additional object added to J that resides as an initial object. 17 Lemma 5.2 (Pointed versions of limits and colimits) . Let C be a category with a terminal object 1.(i) If C has all limits of pattern J, then so does its pointed version [1 ; C] .(ii) If C has all colimits of pattern 1 ⋆ J, then [1 ; C] has all colimits of pattern J.(iii) If C has all colimits of pattern J for some connected category J, then so does [1 ; C] .

Lemma 5.2 is proved in Section C.2. Lemma 5.2 is meant to be used in conjunction with this elementary lemma from Category theory : 

Lemma 5.3 (Functor category has same (co)-limits) . If a category C has limits (or colimits) of a certain shape, then the functor category F (J ; ) also has limits (or colimits) of that exact same shape. 

We next present an important consequence of Lemma 5.2 and Lemma 5.3. 

Theorem 3. Suppose Assumptions 1, 2, and 6 hold. Then (i) the categories F (T ; Y) and StPrsrv have pushouts. (ii) The projection of pushouts lead to pushout diagrams in [1 ; ι].(iii) Suppose that Assumption 5 holds.Then PS (C) has pushouts. 

Theorem 3 is proved in Section C.3. The most useful tool provided by Theorem 3 is the ability to construct pushouts. Recall that a push out is the colimit of a wedge-shaped diagram. In the forthcoming sections, such wedge shaped diagrams will be related to joins, and their resulting pushouts to common factors. As a result we shall see how the most fundamental theorem from join theory originates from the categorical structure inherent in measure spaces. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 21 

(26, Thm 6.6) Let X and Y be two StPrsrv-objects and λ ∈ J(X, Y), then 

A = { A ∈ X ∶ ∃ B ∈ Y , λ (( A × Y )∆(X × B)) = 0}

and 

B = { B ∈ Y ∶ ∃ A ∈ X , λ (( A × Y )∆(X × B)) = 0}

are Γ-invariant sub-σ-algebras. We have 

A × Y = X × Y ∩ X × Y = X × B (mod λ),

and the corresponding factors of X and Y are isomorphic.Using the above isomorphism, we can identify the algebras A = B = Z λ, and consider Z as a common factor. 

## 6 Graphical calculus with joinings. 

Joinings from v-diagrams. Consider the StPrsrv diagram : 

(Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2)(Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) 

> h1h2

(28) 18 This will be called a v-diagram. The systems (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) and (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2) will be called the arms of the diagram, and the system (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) the apex of the diagram. We get a special state of Ω 3 shown below as the composition of the two dotted, green arrows. Ω1 Ω3 Ω2

Ω1 ⊗ Ω2

1  

> (h−12∣μ2)(h−11∣μ1)
> π2π1
> μ3
> j(μ1,μ 2∣h1,h 2)

(29) The lower dotted, green arrow is the copied product : copy (( h−11 ∣μ1), (h−12 ∣μ2)) = [( h−11 ∣μ1) ⊗ ( h−12 ∣μ2)] ○ copy Ω3 ∶ Ω3 → Ω1 ⊗ Ω2

We call this state 

j(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2) ∶= copy (( h−11 ∣μ1), (h−12 ∣μ2)) ○ μ3 ∶ 1 → Ω1 ⊗ Ω2

a join of μ1, μ 2 disintegrated over the common factor μ3.

Lemma 6.1. The disintegrated join constructed in (29) is invariant under ιΦ1 ⊗ ιΦ2 and thus leads to a join of (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) and (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2).

Lemma 6.1 is proved in Section C.4. It follows from Lemma 4.5. We shall denote this join as j(μ1, μ 2 ∣

h1, h 2). An immediate consequence is 

Lemma 6.2. (21, Thm 3.5) If two StPrsrv -objects X and Y have a non-trivial common factor, then they have a non-trivial join too. 

Lemma 6.2 is proved in Section C.5. Rudolph (31) showed that the converse to this conclusion is not true. 

Definition 18 (Factor join) . In the particular instance of (29) in which (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) = ( Ω2, μ 2, Φ2) and 

h1 = h2, the join is called a factor join. Thus given any StPrsrv morphism (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) h

Ð→ ( Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) we denote 

j(μ1 ∣ h) ∶= j(μ1, μ 1 ∣ h, h ).

Lemma 6.3. (20, Thm 4) Suppose two pointed objects (X, μ ) and (Y, ν ) from [1 ; Y] are not disjoint. Then a joint state λ is not a product of states iff the composite 

X X ⊗ Y Y  

> (λ∣π−1
> X)πY

is not constant almost everywhere. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 22 

In the Markov category Stoch , a morphism h ∶ X → Y is to be interpreted as a Markov transition kernel. 19 Interpretation in ergodic theory 23 

In the context of Meas , Lemma 6.3 provides an intuitive interpretation of non-disjointness. If λ is a non-trivial join for probability spaces (X, μ ) and (Y, ν ), then Lemma 6.3 is equivalent to saying that there is a ϕ ∈ L2(Y, ν ) such that the conditional expectation Eλ (g ∣ ΣX × Y ) is non-constant. 

Projection of a joining. Lemma 6.4. Given the v-diagram (28) and a join λ of the two systems 

(Ω1 ⊗ Ω2, λ, Φ1 ⊗ Φ2)(Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2) 

> π2π1

,

the projection 

(h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ, 

of the join λ, leads to a self-joining of the third system (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3).

Lemma 6.4 is proved in Section C.6. Lemma 6.4 shows that given a v-diagram, a join of the arms lead to a self-joining of the apex system. This prompts the following sub-class of joins. 

Definition 19 (Joining over a common factor) . Given the v-diagram (28) , the collection 

J(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2 ∣ μ3) ∶= ⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩

join λ of μ1, μ 2 s.t. 

(h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ is a the self-join 

graph (μ3)⎫⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎬⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎭

is called the set of joinings of (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) and (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2) over a common factor μ3.

Lemma 6.5. If the common factor (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) is the terminal object, then the set J(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2 ∣ μ3)

only contains the product join. 

Lemma 6.5 is proved in Section C.7. 

Projection of joins. 

(Ω3, μ 3, Φ3)(Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2) 

> g2g1Frgt 2

(Ω3, Φ3)(Ω1, Φ1) (Ω2, Φ2)

> Frgt 2(g2)Frgt 2(g1)

(Ω3, Φ3)(Ω1, Φ1) (Ω2, Φ2) 

> Frgt 2(g2)Frgt 2(g1)

pushout 

(Ω3, Φ3)(Ω1, Φ1) (Ω2, Φ2)(Ω4, Φ4) 

> Frgt 2(g2)Frgt 2(g1)
> f1f2

20 Pushout of joins. Theorem 4. Take two StPrsrv -objects (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) and (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2), and a join (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3). Then (i) The pushout of the join (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) is a common factor (Ω4, μ 4, Φ4) of the former two objects. (ii) (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) coincides with the join j(μ1, μ 2 ∣ f1, f 2 ∣ μ4) of (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) and (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2) over μ4.(iii) If (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) is the product join iff (Ω4, μ 4, Φ4) is the trivial terminal dynamics. 

Lemma 6.6 (Dynamics extend to colimits of domains) . Suppose ψ ∶ J → C is a diagram in a category C

with a colimit X. Suppose that there is a functor J-diagram in the category of dynamical systems in C

whose domains realize the diagram ψ. In other words the following commutation diagram exists : 

J F (T ; C) C 

> Fψdom

Then there is a unique dynamical system ¯Φ on X such that the colimiting cone η ∶ ψ ⇒ X serves as a co-cone for F .

Lemma 6.6 is proved in Section C.8. 

## 7 Composition of joinings. 

Joinings can be composed. In classical probability theory, and optimal transport, this process is formally justified by the gluing Lemma , which relies heavily on the disintegration property. Given a setup as shown below 

(X1 ⊗ X2, λ 1,2) (X2 ⊗ X3, λ 2,3)(X1, μ 1) (X2, μ 2) (X3, μ 3)   

> π(1,2)
> 1π(1,2)
> 2π(2,3)
> 2π(2,3)
> 3

we can compose or glue these joins to get a joining of (X1, μ 1) and (X3, μ 3). For that, we first use disintegration of measures to obtain the morphisms (π(1,2)− 12 ∣μ2) and (π(2,3)− 12 ∣μ2) as shown below : 

∃

X2

X1 ⊗ X2  

> (π(1,2)− 12∣μ2)

; ∃

X2

X2 ⊗ X3 

> (π(2,3)− 12∣μ2)

The marginals of these disintegrations, obtained by composing with the marginal projection, may be inter-preted as a categorical analog of conditional expectation : 

X2 X1

X1 ⊗ X2 

> (π(1,2)− 12∣μ2)
> E(X1∣X2,λ 1,2)
> π(1,2)
> 1

;

X2 X3

X2 ⊗ X3 

> (π(2,3)− 12∣μ2)
> E(X3∣X2,λ 2,3)
> π(2,3)
> 3

21 Finally, we collect these conditional expectations by taking their monoidal product, to obtain a jont state on Ω 1 ⊗ Ω3 :

X2 X2 ⊗ X2

1 X1 ⊗ X3copy (2)

> X2
> E(X1∣X2,λ 1,2)⊗ E(X3∣X2,λ 2,3)μ2
> λ1,2○λ2,3

(30) This state λ1,2 ○ λ2,3 can be shown to be a join of μ1 and μ3, by way of the following commutation : 

X1

1 X1 ⊗ X3

X3

> λ1,2○λ2,3
> μ1
> μ3
> π3
> π1

(31) The identity (31) is proved in Section C.9. Thus we have obtained a category theoretic version of the 

Gluing lemma of optimal transport theory (32, e.g.), (33, Lem 7.6). This mechanism is central to proving the triangle inequality for Wasserstein metrics and establishing the foundational topology for spaces of measures. 

Theorem 5 (Compositionality of joinings) . The composition rule (30) for joinings is associative. 

The Disintegration Theorem only guarantees that the families of conditional measures (the Markov kernels) are unique μ-almost everywhere. This means that K12 (x1, ⋅) could theoretically be altered on a set of μ1-measure zero without changing the static joining λ12 . However, this does not break the associativity of the joinings themselves. Because the final step of composition always requires integrating the kernels back against the base marginals (e.g., μ1), any alterations made on a set of measure zero are integrated out. Therefore, while the intermediate kernels are only defined up to an almost-everywhere equivalence class, the final composed joining—the actual measure on X1 × X4—is strictly unique and strictly associative. 

Enrichment. Perrone (34) presented an interesting proposition of interpreting the category Stoch to be enriched over the category of divergence spaces . Our observation that the set of joinings are compositional in nature allow for enrichment over more structured categories that can hold more information about the joinings. Here are some examples 1. For any two probability spaces (X, μ ) and (Y, ν ), the set of all joinings is a convex set: if λ1, λ 2 ∈ j(μ, ν ),then any convex combination tλ 1 + ( 1 − t)λ2 (for t ∈ [ 0, 1]) is also a valid joining. Let Convex be the category of convex spaces whose morphisms are affine maps that preserve convex combinations. To be enriched over Convex , the composition operation must be bilinear (i.e., it must preserve convex combinations). Since composing joinings reduces to integrating Markov kernels, and integration is a linear operator, the composition distributes perfectly over convex combinations: 

(tλ 12 + ( 1 − t)λ′

> 12

) ○ λ23 = t(λ12 ○ λ23 ) + ( 1 − t)( λ′ 

> 12

○ λ23 ).

Thus, probability spaces as objects and joinings as morphisms form a category enriched over Convex .2. If the underlying measure spaces are standard Borel spaces (e.g., Polish spaces equipped with Borel measures), the set of joinings j(μ, ν ) naturally carries the topology of weak convergence (or weak-* topology). By Prokhorov’s Theorem, Π (μ, ν ) is a weakly compact, Hausdorff topological space.Furthermore, 22 the Gluing Lemma composition is continuous with respect to this weak topology. Therefore, you can view this structure as a category enriched over C-Hauss (Compact Hausdorff spaces). This topo-logical enrichment is crucial when proving the existence of optimal transport plans via compactness arguments. 3. By a similar reasoning, Stoch may be enriched over Metric , the category of metric spaces and non-expansive maps. Enriching a category replaces the bare sets of morphisms (hom-sets) with objects from a structured background category, allowing the morphisms themselves to carry geometric, topological, or algebraic data. This shift fundamentally expands what categorical frameworks can compute and model. A Lawvere metric category, created by enrichment over the poset ([ 0, ∞] , ≥, +) is the exact categorical foundation of optimal transport and Wasserstein metrics. Enrichment over Topo or C-Hauss equips the space of morphisms with a topology, thus opening the possibility of analyzing convergence and sequential limits within a categorical setting. Enriching over Abel (Abelian groups) or Vec (vector spaces) yields additive and linear categories. This allows morphisms to be added, subtracted, and scaled—the strict prerequisite for defining kernels, cokernels, and chain complexes. 

## 8 Ergodicity. 

Definition 20 (Ergodicity) . (14, Def 3.8) An invariant state p ∶ 1 → ιΩ of a dynamical system Φ ∶ T → X 

is said to be ergodic if for every invariant deterministic observable c ∶ ιΩ → R , the composite c ○ p ∶ 1 → R is deterministic. 

Note that ergodicity is not a property of the dynamics Φ itself but of an invariant state p of the dynamics. Broadly, it means that any invariant observable c of the dynamical system must be constant. The notion of a ”constant” itself is hard to capture in any other manner in a Markov category. 

Definition 21 (Identity system) . An identity system in category C is a trivial functor F ∶ ⋆ → C from the trivial 1-object category ⋆. Such systems correspond bijectively to the objects of C. If A denotes the one and only object in the image of F , then such a system may be interpreted as the dynamics Id A ∶ A → A.

Note that any semigroup such as T has a unique homomorphism into ⋆. This can be used to pullback any identity system as follows : 

C F (⋆ ; C) F (T ; C) ≅ !T →⋆ ○ .

Thus any identity system may be artificially interpreted as a system with time structure T . Now note that if the category C has a terminal element 1, then any dynamical system bears a homomorphism with an identity system. Let us take a general dynamics Φ ∶ T → C with domain Ω, and aa stationary system Id ∶ T → C with domain A. Fix a state /element a ∶ 1 → A. Then we have commutations 

A 1 AA 1 A  

> !ΦtId
> a
> Id !a

, ∀t ∈ T .

The second column is the identity system with domain 1. The third column is the identity system on A.

Definition 22 (Irreducible dynamics) . A dynamical system Φ ∶ T → C with domain Ω is said to be irreducible if it has no non-trivial morphism to an identity system. 

23 Lemma 8.1. If there is an StPrsrv -morphism from an identity system to an StPrsrv object X, then X

must be an identity system itself. 

Definition 23 (Ergodic extensions) . Let C be any category, and consider two dynamical systems Φ, Ψ ∶T → C . A homomorphism of dynamical systems π ∶ Φ ⇒ Ψ is said to be an ergodic extension if any Φ-invariant observable can be factored through a Ψ-invariant observable. In other words, if Φ, Ψ ∶ T → C are two dynamical systems with domains Ω, Λ respectively, and there is a semi-conjugacy π as shown below on the left : 

Ω ΩΛ Λ

> π
> Φt
> π
> Ψt

is an ergodic extension 

⇔

Ω Ω

Y

Λ Λ

> απ
> Φt
> πα
> Ψt

⇒ ∃ 

Λ

Y 

> β

∶

Ω Ω

Y

Λ Λ

> απ
> Φt
> παβ
> Ψt
> β

(32) 

then any Φ-invariant observable α as shown in the middle, must factor through a Ψ-invariant observable β

as shown on the right. 

Lemma 8.2 (Ergodicity of extensions of identity) . (26, Lem 6.24) Take a morphism ϕ ∶ ( Ω, μ, Φ) → (Z, η, Id Z ) to an identity system. Then π is ergodic iff for any morphism of the form π ∶ ( X, ν, Id X ) → (Z, η, Id Z ), (Ω, μ, Φ) and (X, ν, Id X ) over their common factor (Z, η, Id Z ).

Lemma 8.2 is proved in Section D.1. Lemma 8.2 will be key in establishing equivalent characterizations of ergodicity later in Theorem 9. 

## 9 Sequence spaces. 

Take objects (X, μ X ) and (Y, μ Y ) in the slice category [1 ; Y] , and a diagram as shown below :       

> (X⊗Y, λ )(X, μ X)(Y, μ Y)
> πYπX

(33) Then the rule of disintegration (19) applid to the diagram (33), there is a morphism (π−1 

> Y

∣λ) ∶ Y → X ⊗ Y

such that the following commutation holds : 

YX ⊗ Y

> (π−1
> Y ∣λ)

∶                   

> X⊗YX⊗Y⊗Y
> 1Y⊗X⊗YYY⊗Y
> graph (πY)
> swap ≅
> π−1
> Y○λλ
> copy
> Y⊗( π−1
> Y∣λ)

Definition 24 (Conditional of marginals) . Given the diagram (33) , the disintegration (π−1 

> Y

∣λ) leads to the composite morphism which we call the conditional of the marginal X w.r.t the marginal Y , shown below as 

24 a dashed green arrow : 

Y XX ⊗ Y   

> (π−1
> Y∣λ)
> λY∣X
> πX

(34) This The following observation will be of use to us 

Lemma 9.1. The disintegration (π−1 

> Y

∣λ) is the copied product of the conditional λY ∣X (34) and the identity on Y . In other words, the following commutation holds : 

Y X ⊗ YY ⊗ Y   

> copy
> (π−1
> Y∣λ)
> λY∣X⊗Y

(35) 

Infinite powers. Fix a set S for the rest of this chapter. Then one has a poset created from the collection of subsets of S :2S ∶= poset of subsets of S. 

Definition 25 (Co-filtration) . An S-indexed co-filtration is an member of the following functor category : Co-F(C ; S) ∶= F (( 2S )op ; C) .

Definition 26 (Power induced co-filtration) . For any object Ω of C, the S-indexed co-filtration created by powers of Ω is the functor 

Pow Ω,S ∈ Co-F(C ; S),AA′⊂ ↦⊗∣A′∣Ω

⊗∣A∣Ω

> πA′→A

Definition 27 (Co-filtered limit) . An object X of Y is said to have a cofiltered limit of order S for some indexing set S, if S-indexed co-filtration Pow X,S created by powers of Ω has a limit. This limit is denoted as ⊗∣S∣X.

Definition 28 (Shift spaces) . Suppose an object X of Y has a cofiltered limit indexed by T . Then there is a natural dynamics with domain ⊗∣T ∣ X given by 

⊗∣J+t∣X ⊗∣J∣X

⊗∣T ∣ X ⊗∣T ∣ X

⊗∣J′+t∣X ⊗∣J′∣X 

> +tπJ′+t
> πJ+t
> shift t
> πJ′
> πJ
> πJ′+t→J+tπJ′→J
> +t

, ∀J ⊆ J′ ⊂f in Hom (T ) . (36) 

This dynamics is called a shift or a shift-flow .

Theorem 6 (Shift-space dynamics) . Suppose an object X of Y has a cofiltered limit indexed by T . Then the shift space from Definition 28 is a proper dynamical system. Take any morphism μ ∶ 1 → X. Then 

25 (i) there is a unique morphism ⊗∣T ∣ μ ∶ 1 → ⊗ ∣T ∣ X such that 

⊗∣J∣X

1 ⊗∣T ∣ X

⊗∣J′∣X 

> ⊗∣J∣μ
> ⊗∣J′∣μ
> ⊗∣T ∣ μπJ′
> πJ
> πJ′→J

, ∀J ⊆ J′ ⊂f in Hom (T ) .

(ii) This morphism ⊗∣T ∣ μ is invariant under the shift. 

Theorem 6 is proved in Section D.2. 

Definition 29 (Infinite copied products) . Suppose an object X of Y has a cofiltered limit indexed by a set 

S. Suppose there is a Y-morphism f ∶ Y → X. Then there is a unique morphism 

copy ∣S∣(f ) ∶ Y → ⊗ ∣S∣X, 

such that the following commutations holds 

⊗∣J∣XY ⊗∣T ∣ X

⊗∣J′∣X    

> copy ∣J∣(f)
> copy ∣J′∣(f)
> copy ∣S∣(f)
> πJ′
> πJ
> πJ′→J

, ∀J ⊆ J′ ⊂f in Hom (T ) .

Definition 30 (Infinite copies of states) . Suppose that an object X of the Markov category Y has tensor products of order ∣S∣ for some indexing set S. Recall the conditional morphism λY ∣X from (34) .

1 ⊗∣S∣XY   

> μY
> μ∣S∣
> Y→X
> copy ∣S∣(λY∣X)

,

1 (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ YY Y ⊗ Y    

> μY
> ˜μ∣S∣
> Y→X
> copy Y
> copy ∣S∣(λY∣X)⊗ Y

(37) In conclusion, starting with the join / span on the left, we end with the construction on the right : 

(X, μ X )(X ⊗ Y, λ )(Y, μ Y )

> πY
> πX

⇒

1

⊗∣S∣X Y X

(⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y Y X ⊗ Y       

> μY
> λ∣S∣
> Y→X
> ˜λ∣S∣
> Y→X=λY∣X
> λY→X
> π1
> π2πY
> πX

Definition 31 (Permutations) . Suppose that an object X of the Markov category Y has co-filtered limits 

26 of order ∣S∣ for some indexing set S. The any bijection σ ∶ S ≅

Ð→ S of S leads to an induced automorphism, which we also denote as σ. Such as automorphism is called a permutation in the coordinates of ⊗∣S∣X.

Lemma 9.2 (Permutation invariance) . (20, Lem 9) Consider the pointed object (˜μ∣S∣  

> Y→X

, (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y ) con-structed as in (37) . If there is a morphism g ∶ (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y → R which remains invariant under all finite permutations in the coordinates of ⊗∣S∣X, then g factors through the deletion morphism πY ∶ ⊗ ∣S∣X ⊗ Y → Y .

Lemma 9.2 thus says that the following group action finite permutations Endo (XS × Y )

has as colimit the projection morphism : proj Y ∶ XS × Y → Y. 

Lemma 9.3. Suppose λ is a non-trivial joining of two StPrsrv -objects (X, ΣX , μ X , ΦtX ) and (Y, ΣY , μ Y , ΦtY ).Then there is a morphism g ∶ Y → such that Eλ (g∣π1) is not constant. fill 

Lemma 9.4. (20, Thm 4) Consider the pointed object (˜μ∣S∣  

> Y→X

, (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y ) constructed as in (37) . Then the composite morphism 

X∞ X∞ ⊗ Y Y  

> (λ∞∣π−1
> X∞)πY

is invariant under finite permutations in the coordinates of X∞.

Then G is invariant under all permutations of coordinates in X and hence by Lemma 9.2, it factors through π2 ∶ (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y → Y . By Lemma 9.3 G also factors through π1 ∶ (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y → ⊗ ∣S∣X. Also G is non-constant. This means that the pushout of π1 and π2 is non-trivial. 

Theorem 7 (Push-pull theorem) . The sub-diagram above highlighted in brown above has a pushout / colimit in the slice category [1 ; ι](μ∣S∣  

> Y→X

, ⊗∣S∣X)(˜μ∣S∣  

> Y→X

, (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y ) Z(μY , Y )

> π1
> π2

(38) 

Moreover, the object (˜μ∣S∣  

> Y→X

, (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y ) is the unique cone above the v-diagram created by the right half of this picture whose second component is (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y .

Lemma 6.3, Lemma 9.4 

Lemma 9.5 (Relative independence theorem) . (26, Thm 6.25) 

Corollary 8. (21, Thm 3.6) (35) (20, Thm 4) If two StPrsrv -objects X and Y have a non-trivial join, then Y has a common factor with some countable self-join of X.

27 (ιΩX ⊗ ιΩY , μ X ⊗ μY , ι ΦX ⊗ ιΦY )(ιΩX , μ X , ι ΦX ) (ιΩY , μ Y , ι ΦY )

> πYπX

(a) Start with a join (12) of two StPrsrv-object / dy-namical systems.            

> (ιΩX⊗ιΩY, μ X⊗μY)(ιΩX, μ X)(ιΩY, μ Y)
> πYπX

(b) Restrict this into the slice category [1 ; ι]           

> (μ∣S∣
> Y→X,⊗∣S∣X)(˜μ∣S∣
> Y→X,(⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y)Z(μY, Y )
> π1
> π2

(c) Use infinite copied products (Def 29) to create the left half of the above diagram. Construct the pushout 

Z. By Theorem 7 the object (˜μ∣S∣  

> Y→X

, (⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y ) is the unique cone above the v-diagram created by the right half of this picture whose second component is 

(⊗ ∣S∣X) ⊗ Y .

a

(d) Step 

Figure 1: Application of Theorem 7 

## 10 Disjointness. 

The notion of disjointness was championed by Furstenberg and others (36; 37, e.g.) in 

Definition 32 (Disjointness) . (36) Two StPrsrv objects are said to be disjoint if their only join is their product join. More generally, given a v-diagram as in (28) , the StPrsrv -objects (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) and (Ω2, μ 2, Φ2)

are said to be disjoint over the common factor (Ω3, μ 3, Φ3) if the only element of J(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2 ∣ μ3) is 

j(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2)

Lemma 10.1 (Product of disjoint systems is a categorical product) . Two StPrsrv objects (Ω1, μ 1, Φ1) and 

(Ω2, μ 2, Φ2) are disjoint iff their product join is their categorical product in StPrsrv .

Definition 33 (Arithmetic completeness) . A subset of StPrsrv -objects is said to be arithmetically complete / has arithmetic completeness if it is closed under taking factors and countable joins. 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 24 

A measure-preserving dynamical system (X, μ, Φ) is called a zero-entropy system if its metric entropy / Kolmogorov-Sinai metric entropy hμ(Φ) is zero. Metric entropy quantifies the average rate at which a system generates complexity by the separation of trajectories over time. Therefore, a system with zero entropy lacks the exponential divergence and inherent unpredictability, often interpreted as the broad concept of ”chaos”. This makes zero-entropy systems highly predictable; their future states can be forecasted with sub-exponential error growth given a finite precision of the initial state. Classic examples include identity maps, periodic transformations, and irrational rotations on a circle. While they do not exhibit strong mixing properties, the study of zero-entropy systems is remarkably rich, relying heavily on spectral theory and algebraic invariants to classify structured, deterministic behaviors (38, e.g.). They also form a familiy of dynamical systems which are arithmetically complete (39; 40, e.g.). 28 Interpretation in ergodic theory 25 

A measure-preserving dynamical system is said to have a discrete spectrum (or pure point spectrum) if the Hilbert space of square-integrable functions over its state space is spanned entirely by the eigen-functions of its associated Koopman operator. Such systems are fundamentally characterized by their regular, highly predictable, and rotation-like dynamics, lacking the strong mixing properties found in chaotic systems. The landmark Halmos-von Neumann representation theorem established that ergodic systems with a discrete spectrum are isomorphic to group translations on compact abelian groups, completely classifying them up to measure-theoretic isomorphism. Structurally, it has been shown that ergodic transformations with a discrete spectrum belong to the class of stacking transfor-mations, meaning they can be explicitly constructed via cutting and stacking methods using single stacks (41). Modern investigations have expanded these classifications into topological dynamics, demonstrating that factors of totally ergodic systems with quasi-discrete spectra inherently possess zero entropy (42). Discrete-spectrum systems also form a family of dynamical systems which are arithmetically complete (36, e.g.) 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 26 

Weakly mixing systems 

Interpretation in ergodic theory 27 

In the context of ergodic theory and topological dynamics, an isometric system (or more broadly, an isometric extension) refers to a measure-preserving dynamical system where the transformation acts as an isometry along the fibers of the extension with respect to some compatible metric (43). Such systems are intrinsically rigid, exhibiting regular, predictable behavior and zero Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy along the fibers. These structured extensions are fundamental building blocks of dynamical systems; for instance, the rigorous classification of isometric extensions of multidimensional Bernoulli shifts helps mathematically isolate completely deterministic factors from purely mixing ones (Kam-meyer, 1992). In the measure-theoretic framework, isometric extensions are closely associated with systems possessing relative discrete spectrums, which stand in sharp contrast to purely chaotic, weakly mixing extensions, though they can still support unique equilibrium measures when extending strongly chaotic Anosov systems (Spatzier and Visscher, 2016). Furthermore, the structural rigidity of iso-metric extensions is frequently analyzed using joining theory, where properties like quasi-simplicity dictate that any ergodic non-product self-joining of the system must be strictly isometric over its marginals (Danilenko, 2007). Such joining-based classifications also play a critical role in distinguish-ing positive-entropy, ”dominant” systems from those exhibiting distal or isometric constraints (Austin et al., 2022). 29 Interpretation in ergodic theory 28 

a Kolmogorov automorphism, or K-system, is a measure-preserving dynamical system characterized by having completely positive entropy (CPE) (Call and Park, 2020). This means that every non-trivial factor of the system has strictly positive Kolmogorov-Sinai entropy, lacking any deterministic or zero-entropy components. Formally, a system is a K-automorphism if it possesses a sub-σ-algebra—often called a K-algebra—that grows to generate the entire σ-algebra under the forward transformation and shrinks to the trivial σ-algebra under the inverse, meaning its associated Pinsker algebra is trivial. Because of this structure, K-systems sit relatively high in the ergodic hierarchy, being strictly stronger than strongly mixing systems and weaker than Bernoulli shifts. While K-systems are necessarily mixing of all degrees, the converse is not universally true, as there exist stationary Gaussian processes that are mixing of all degrees but fail to be Kolmogorov automorphisms (Dugdale, 1966). Nonetheless, the K-property is a hallmark of robust chaos and is frequently established in physics and smooth dynamics, such as proving that certain nonuniformly hyperbolic maps and billiard flows are not only K-systems but also Bernoulli (44). The structural rigidity of these chaotic systems is frequently analyzed using joining theory; for instance, joinings can be used to prove that systems with completely positive entropy are fundamentally disjoint from all zero-entropy systems (Ryzhikov and Thouvenot, 2024). Furthermore, relatively independent joinings serve as essential tools to dissect characteristic factors and limit behaviors in extensions of systems possessing varying degrees of mixing and entropy (Ackelsberg, 2024). (45) 

Theorem 9 (Equivalent characterization of ergodicity) . Let μ be an invariant state in Y of a dynamical system Φ ∶ T → X with domain Ω. Then the following are equivalent (i) μ is an ergodic state of (ιΩ, ι Φ);(ii) the StPrsrv -object (Ω, μ, Φ) is irreducible; (iii) the StPrsrv -object (Ω, μ, Φ) is disjoint from every identity system; (iv) the terminal morphism (Ω, μ, Φ) !

Ð→ ( 1, 1, Id ) is an ergodic extension. 

(i) implies (ii). (ii) implies (i). (ii) implies (iii). (iii) implies (ii). Suppose property (iii) holds. This means that (Ω, μ, Φ) has no non-trivial morphism to an identity system. Then by Lemma 8.1 and Theorem 4 (iii), 

(ii) implies (iii). Lemma 8.2. This completes the proof of Theorem 9. 

Definition 34 (Birkhoff property) . A dynamical system (X, f, μ ) has Birkhoff property if the following condition is satisfied: If a state h with the marginal for X being is invariant under f × 1Y , i.e., the diagrams 

30 f n 1Y

h

coincides for all n ≥ 0, then these diagrams coincide with 

μ 1Y

h

Theorem 10. For a dynamical system (X, f, μ ), where f is deterministic, the following properties hold: 1. If there is only one joining between (X, f, μ ) and (Y, 1Y , ν ) for all ν, (X, f, μ ) is ergodic. 2. If (X, f, μ ) satisfies Birkhoff property, there is only one joining between (X, f, μ ) and (Y, 1Y , ν ) for all ν.

Theorem 10 is proved in Section D.3. 

## 11 Applications. 

I. Classical ergodic theory. II. Finite multi-sets. Definition 35 (Finite Multi-sets) . (46) The category FinSetMult is defined by 

• Objects are finite sets 

• Morphisms are set-valued maps 

• Composition of f ∶ X → Y and g ∶ Y → Z is defined by 

g ○ f (x) ∶= ⋃ 

> y∈f(x)

g(y).

This is a Markov category. Deterministic morphisms corresponds to single-valued maps. 

Lemma 11.1. In FinSetMult , a state μ ∶ I → X corresponds to a subset A = μ(∗) of X. For a morphism 

f ∶ X → X, a state μ ∶ I → X is invariant if and only if A = μ(∗) ⊂ X satisfies 

A = ⋃ 

> x∈A

f (x).

31 We note that a morphism f ∶ X → X corresponds to a directed graph with vertex set X. Invariant states define subgraphs. 

Theorem 11. In FinSetMult , a state μ ∶ I → X is ergodic with respect to a morphism f ∶ X → X if and only if the corresponding graph is weakly connected. Proof. Let μ ∶ I → X be ergodic with respect to a morphism f ∶ X → X. We can define a deterministic morphism c ∶ X → N by assigning to which connected component x ∈ X is contained. This is f -invariant by the construction. Thus, by ergodicity, c ○ μ is deterministic. This means c takes the same value on μ(∗) .Therefore the graph with vertices μ(∗) is weakly connected. Conversely, let the corresponding graph be weakly connected. If a deterministic morphism c ∶ X → Y is 

f -invariant, we have c(x) = c(y) for every edge x → y in the graph. By weak connectedness, c assumes the same value on μ(∗) . This implies c ○ μ is deterministic. 

Example 1. The following morphism f ∶ X → X is ergodic on X = { 1, 2}:

1 2

Let B = {( 1, 1), (2, 1), (2, 2)} ⊂ X × X. Then B is invariant under f × 1X , but it cannot be written as a direct product. Therefore, f is ergodic but does not have Birkhoff property. Further, this observation shows that f has more than two joinings with identity map 1X .

Lemma 11.2. Let μ ∶ I → X be an ergodic invariant state for a deterministic f ∶ X → X. Then, μ(∗) 

consists of a periodic orbit. Proof. Let A ∶= μ(∗) . By invariance and determinism, every x ∈ A has y ∈ A such that x = f (y). Thus, 

f ∣A ∶ A → A is surjective. Since A is finite, f ∣A is injective. Therefore A consists of periodic orbits. By ergodicity, there can be at most one orbit. 

Theorem 12. In FinSetMult , deterministic ergodic systems have Birkhoff property. Proof of Theorem. Let f ∶ X → X be deterministic and μ ∶ I → X be ergodic invariant state. Let λ ∶ I →

X × Y be an f × 1Y -invariant state such that X projection of λ(∗) =∶ B coincide with μ(∗) = A.For each (x, y ) ∈ B, we have A × { y} ⊂ B by the invariance and the preceding lemma. Thus, B is a direct product of the form A × C.

III. Multivalued maps. Reqrite : Multi-valued maps (47) The Conley index (48) of S can be determined without explicit knowledge of the specific isolated invariant set through associated index pairs, which provide rough topological enclosures of S. In the case of classical continuous-time dynamical systems the Conley index can either be defined as a pointed topological space, or in a more computationally friendly version, as a homology module. challenge in this context is the lack of homotopies along trajectories for discrete time. In fact, entirely new techniques, based on so-called index maps, were needed. The first such technique, using shape theory, was proposed by Robbin and Salamon (49). A cohomological Conley index, more practical in computational terms, was proposed in (4). A unifying, general approach was presented by Szymczak (50). Later, Franks and Richeson (51) showed that Szymczak’s approach is equivalent to a construction using the more com-monly known shift equivalence. As we already mentioned, combinatorial dynamics has to be multivalued to be interesting. Conley’s theory has successfully been extended to the case of multivalued discrete-time dynamics, see for example (52; 53; 54; 55; 56) and the references therein. However, all of these papers concern only discretization in time, not in space. 32 12 Off-diagonal joinings. 

Recall off-diagonal joinings from Definition 13. 

Definition 36 (2-simple systems) . (26, Sec 6.1), (31) An StPrsrv -object will be called 2-simple if every ergodic self-joining of order 2 is either the product join, or an off-diagonal join. 

Definition 37 (Minimal self-joinings) . (31, pg 2) Consider any StPrsrv object (Ω, μ, Φ). Let κ be a count-able ordinal, ℓ ∶ κ → T ∖ { 0} a map. Consider the state 

graph (μ, ℓ ) ∶= graph (⊗ n∈κΦℓ(n)) ○ μ ∶ 1 → Ωκ

Then the following StPrsrv object is a κ-fold self-join of (Ω, μ, Φ) :

(Ωκ, graph (μ, ℓ ) , ⊗n∈κΦℓ(n))

Then (Ω, μ, Φ) is said to have minimal self-joinings of order ℓ if the only non-trivial κ-fold self joinings of 

Ω are such off-diagonal states. We say in absolute terms that (Ω, μ, Φ) has minimal self-joinings if for any such κ and ℓ, (Ω, μ, Φ) has minimal self-joinings of order ℓ.

Definition 38 (Compact group of permutations) . (31, pg 14) A group H of permutations of a countable set 

κ is compact if H(¯κ) is finite for any finite subset ¯κ. This means κ breaks into finite H invariant subsets on each of which H acts transitively. 

Definition 39 (Compact permutation) . (31, pg 14) A permutation π on a countable ordinal κ is said to be compact if the group it generates is compact. Equivalently, this means that π has only finite cycles. 

For a compact permutation π on a countable ordinal κ, and a mapping ℓ ∶ κ → T , define 

U (π, ℓ ) ∶= Sπ ○ ⊗ 

> n∈κ

Φℓ(n).

= Sπ.

Definition 40 (Product commutants) .Lemma 12.1. (31, Thm 3.1) Suppose that an StPrsrv object (Ω, μ, Φ) has minimal self joinings. Take two countable ordinals κ and κ′, with two compact permutations π, π ′. Suppose that there are two mappings 

ℓ, ℓ ∶ κ → T such that both U (π, l ) and U (π′, l ′) are ergodic. Finally suppose that there is a morphism 

h ∶ Ωκ → Ωκ′

such that hU (π, ℓ )h−1 = U (π′, ℓ ′). Then (i) h takes the form h = Sα ⊗n∈κ Φˆl(n) for some α ∶ κ → κ′ and ˆl ∶ κ → T .(ii) Moreover, 

απα −1 = π′, ℓ (t) = ℓ′(α(t)) + ( ˆl(t) − ˆl(π(t))) 

Lemma 12.2. (31, Cor 3.2) If an StPrsrv object has minimal self joinings, then it has trivial product commutants. 

## 13 Conclusions. 

Rank-1 systems. Rank 1 measure preserving transformations (57; 58; 59, e.g.). King’s weak closure theorem for rank-1 systems (60) using coding arguments. Ryzhikov (61) translated this into the language of second-order self-joins (62) (63) (64) 33 Minimal self-joinings. fill Rudolph constructed a system with 2-fold minimal self-joining (31) using a special construction of Ornstein (65). The example so constructed is a mixing rank-one system. It was shown separately in (66) that all mixing rank-one systems have 2-fold minimal self-joinings. The existence of a transformation with minimal self-joinings provides a handy theoretical tool for pro-ducing some remarkable examples of counter-intuitive behavior in ergodic theory. Some examples are (i) a transformation Φ which has no roots, but whoose second iterate Φ 2 has roots of all order; (ii) two measure-preserving dynamical systems which are weakly isomorphic (each one is a factor of the other) but not isomorphic; (iii) a transformation Φ with a cubic root but no square root. 

Chacon transformations. (67) (68) 

Simple systems. (69) (45) (70) 

## A Markov categories. A.1 Basic tools. In this section we recall some useful observations from the theory of Markov categories. 

1. Deletion of a branch after parallel composition is the same as an individual morphism. More precisely, the any two morphisms f, g as shown on the left satisfy the condition shown on the right : 

∀

AX 

> f

, , AY 

> G

⇒

A A ⊗ AX X ⊗ Y 

> f
> copy (2)
> A
> f⊗gX⊗del Y

(39) 

2. For any two morphisms f, g ∶ Ω → Y between the same pair of objects, equality of these morphisms imply almost sure equality w.r.t. any state p ∶ 1 → Ω on Ω, which in turn implies that f ○ p equals g ○ p . In other words : 

∀

1Ω 

> p

,

Ω

Y 

> f

,

Ω

Y 

> g

∶

Ω

Y 

> f

=

Ω

Y 

> g

⇒

1Ω

Y 

> p
> graph (f)

=

1Ω

Y 

> p
> graph g

⇒

1Ω

Y

> pf

=

1Ω

Y

> pg

(40) 

3. Disintegration of joint states : Consider the diagram on the left presenting a joint state λ for two objects X1, X 2 :

(X1 ⊗ X2, λ 1,2)(X1, μ 1) (X2, μ 2)  

> π1π2

⇒ ∃

X2

X1 ⊗ X2 

> (π−12∣λ)

34 The marginals of this joint state are respectively λ1, λ 2. Such an arrangement means that we can construct the disintegration of λ along the projection π2, as indicated on the right. Applying the disintegration rules (20) and (21) gives graph T (π−12 ∣λ) ○ μ2 = graph (π2) ○ λ. 

and 

π2 ○ ( π−12 ∣λ) = Id X2 , μ2 − almost surely .

The first identity is an equality of two morphisms from 1 to X1 ⊗ X2 ⊗ X2. Thus their marginals over the first coordinate must be equal. So have 

E(X1∣X2, λ ) ○ μ2 = π(X1⊗X2⊗X2) 

> 1

○ graph T (π−12 ∣λ) ○ μ2

= π(X1⊗X2⊗X2) 

> 1

○ graph (π2) ○ λ

= π(X1⊗X2) 

> 1

○ π(X1⊗X2⊗X2) 

> 1,2

○ graph (π2) ○ λ

= π(X1⊗X2) 

> 1

○ Id X1⊗X2 ○λ = π(X1⊗X2) 

> 1

○ λ

= μ1

In conclusion, we have proved : 

E(X1∣X2, λ ) ○ μ2 = π1 ○ ( π−12 ∣λ) ○ μ2 = μ1 (41) 

## A.2 Bayesian inversion. 

Lemma A.1 (Invariant and Bayesian inversion) . (71, Lem 5.2) Consider two morphisms shown below on the left 

∀

1ΩΩ

> pt

∶

1Ω Ω 

> ppt

∶⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩

f ○ t†

= p − a.s. 

f

⎫⎪⎪⎪⎬⎪⎪⎪⎭⇒⎧⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎩

f ○ t

= p − a.s. 

f

⎫⎪⎪⎪⎬⎪⎪⎪⎭

(42) 

such that the invariance condition shown in the center holds. Let t† denote the Bayesian inverse of t. Then for every p-a.s. deterministic morphism f ∶ Ω → X the implication shown on the right above holds. 

(f ⊗ f ) ○ graph T (t) ○ p = ( f ⊗ f ) ○ graph (t†) ○ p, by (20) ,

= ( f ⊗ f ) ○ ( Id Ω ⊗f †) ○ copy Ω ○p

= [( f ○ Id X ) ⊗ ( f ○ f †)] ○ copy Ω ○p

= [( f ○ Id X ) ⊗ f ] ○ copy Ω ○p, by assumptio ,

= ( f ⊗ f ) ○ copy Ω ○p. 

Lemma A.2. The disintegration of any deterministic isomorphism is the inverse of that isomorphism. 

35 ∀

1Ω 

> p

, ∀ invetible ,

deterministic ΩΩ 

> ψ

∶

1Ω Ω 

> ppψ

⇒

Ω ⊗ ΩΩ ⊗ Ω 1 Ω Ω ⊗ ΩΩ ⊗ Ω   

> ≅≅
> pcopy Ω
> (f○ψ)⊗ Ω
> f⊗ψ−1

(43) To see why note that 

[( f ○ ψ) ⊗ Ω] ○ copy Ω ○p = ( f ⊗ Ω) ○ graph T (ψ) ○ p

= ( f ⊗ Ω) ○ graph (ψ−1∣p) ○ ψ ○ p, by (20) ,

= ( f ⊗ Ω) ○ graph (ψ−1∣p) ○ p, by assumption 

= ( f ⊗ Ω) ○ graph (ψ−1) ○ p, by Lemma A.2 

= ( f ⊗ ψ−1) ○ p. 

## A.3 Conditional independence. In classical probability theory, two measurements on a proba-bility space are considered to be conditional independent if their joint probability distribution is the product of their individual marginal distributions. This notion extends easily to categorical probability. 

Definition 41 (Conditional independence) . (16, Def 2.10) Given a morphism p ∶ A → X1 ⊗ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⊗ Xn , p is said to display the conditional independence X1 ⊥ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⊥ Xn ∥ A if the following equality holds 

p = ⊗ ni=1 (πi ○ p) .

Note that conditional independence does not depend on the order of the marginals. This is because if the conditional independence X1 ⊥ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⊥ Xn ∥ A holds, then composing p with any permutation σ of the tensor factors X1, . . . , X n gives a morphism A → Xσ(1) ⊗ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⊗ Xσ(n) which displays the conditional independence 

Xσ(1) ⊥ ⋅ ⋅ ⋅ ⊥ Xσ(n) ∥ A. Therefore if ⊗j∈F Xj is a finite product without any particular order on the factors, then there is no ambiguity in writing ⊥j∈F Xj ∥ A.

Lemma A.3 (Abstract Hewitt–Savage zero–one law) . (16, Thm 5.4) Suppose that C is a causal Markov category (Definition 2.7). Let XJ be a Kolmogorov power of an object X ∈ C with respect to an infinite set J. Suppose that morphisms p ∶ A → XJ and deterministic s ∶ XJ → T satisfy the following: p displays the conditional independence ⊥i∈J Xi ∥ A.For every finite permutation σ ∶ J → J, we have ˆσp = p and 

sˆσ = s.Then the composite sp ∶ A → T is deterministic. 

## A.4 Proof of Lemma 9.2. Lemma 9.2 is a direct consequence of Lemma A.3. This is due to the fact that the Bernoulli measure is permutation invariant, and the projection morphisms are deterministic. 36 B Lemmas from ergodic theory. B.1 Proof of Lemma 4.1. We need to show that for every t ∈ T , the transformed state (ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ ιΦt

> 2

)○ (graph (h) ○ μ1) is again graph (h) ○ μ1. This identity is derived as follows : 

(ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ ιΦt

> 2

) ○ ( graph (h) ○ μ1) = ( ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ ιΦt

> 2

) ○ ( ιΩ1 ⊗ h) ○ copy ιΩ1 ○μ1

= [( ιΦt 

> 1

○ ιΩ1 ) ⊗ ( ιΦt 

> 2

○ h)] ○ copy ιΩ1 ○μ1 = [( ιΦt 

> 1

○ ιΩ1 ) ⊗ ( h ○ ιΦt

> 1

)] ○ copy ιΩ1 ○μ1

= ( ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ h) ○ ( ιΩ1 ⊗ Φt

> 1

) ○ copy ιΩ1 ○μ1 = ( ιΩ1 ⊗ h) ○ ( ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ Φt

> 1

) ○ copy ιΩ1 ○μ1

= ( ιΩ1 ⊗ h) ○ copy ιΩ1 ○ιΦt 

> 1

○ μ1, by determinism of Φ 1,

= ( ιΩ1 ⊗ h) ○ copy ιΩ1 ○μ1, since μ1 is invariant under Φ 1,

= graph (h) ○ μ1.

This completes the proof of Lemma 4.1. 

## B.2 Proof of Theorem 1. Since Lemma 2.1 already establishes the monoidal properties of the pointed version, one only needs to verify the rules (4)–(6) of copy and deletion are satisfied. 1 X X ⊗ Xx

> copy X,x
> copy X

X

1 X X ⊗ Xx 

> copy X,x
> x
> copy X
> ≅πi

This completes the proof of Theorem 1. 

## B.3 Proof of Theorem 2. We first show that (i) ⇒ (ii). So we take a functor Φ ∶ T → [ 1 ; ι]. The category T has a unique object ⋆T , and its image under Φ is a pointed object 1 μ

Ð→ ιΩ for some X -object Ω. Note that for each morphism t ∈ T , the image under Φ is a morphism Φ t ∶ Ω → Ω. Its image ιΦt ∶ ιΩ → ιΩunder ι must preserve μ. Compositionality of the functor Φ implies 1

ιΩ ιΩ ιΩ  

> μμμ
> Φt
> Φt
> Φs

, ∀s, t ∈ T . (44) The diagram indicates that Φ acts on the semi-group of endomorphisms of ιΩ as well. With this interpre-tation, note that the state μ ∶ 1 → ιΩ acts as a natural transformation. This is precisely the pair described in (ii). The converse also follows from the same diagram. This completes the proof of Theorem 2. 

## B.4 Proof of Lemma 4.3. This completes the proof of Lemma 4.3. 37 B.5 Proof of Lemma 4.5. We need to show that for every t ∈ T :graph (( h−1∣μX ) ○ ιΦtY ) ○ μY = graph (ιΦtX ○ ( h−1∣μX )) ○ μY .

This can be derived as follows : graph (( h−1∣μX ) ○ ιΦtY ) ○ μY = [( ιΩY ) ⊗ (( h−1∣μX ) ○ ιΦtY )] ○ copy Y ○μY

Using (27) fill This completes the proof of Lemma 4.5. 

## C Pointed categories. C.1 Proof of Lemma 2.1. 

X

1 X ∧x,y Y X ⊗ YY

1 (X, x ) ⊗ ( Y, y )   

> X⊗( y○!X)
> xy
> ∃!!(x○!Y)⊗ Y)

Let [X, Y ] denote the internal hom in C. We construct the pointed internal hom [( X, x ), (Y, y )] ∗ via an equalizer in C.We have two canonical maps from [X, Y ] to Y :Evaluation at the basepoint: [X, Y ] x∗

Ð→[1, Y ] ≅ Y The constant map at y: [X, Y ] !

Ð→ 1 y

Ð→ Y Define the underlying object [( X, x ), (Y, y )] ∗ as the equalizer of these two maps.To point this object, note that the constant map 1 → [ X, Y ] (the adjunct of 1 × X !

Ð→ 1 y

Ð→ Y ) equalizes the two maps above. By the universal property of the equalizer, this constant map factors uniquely through a map 1 → [( X, x ), (Y, y )] ∗, establishing its basepoint. We must show a natural bijection of hom-sets in [1, C] :hom ∗(A ∧ X, Y ) ≅ hom ∗(A, [X, Y ]∗)

Let f ∶ A∧X → Y be a pointed map. By the universal property of the smash product pushout, f is uniquely determined by a map ˜f ∶ A × X → Y in C whose restriction to the wedge sum A ∨ Y factors through the terminal object to the basepoint y ∶ 1 → Y .This restriction imposes two conditions on ˜f : ˜f ○ ( id A × x) = y○!A

(It collapses A × { x} to y) ˜f ○ ( a × id X ) = y○!X (It collapses {a} × X to y)Under the standard adjunction in C,˜f ∶ A × X → Y corresponds to a unique map ˆf ∶ A → [ X, Y ]. We translate the two conditions:Condition (1) means that for any generalized element of A, its image in [X, Y ] evaluates at x to y. Categorically, ˆf factors through the equalizer defining [X, Y ]∗.Condition (2) means that the basepoint a ∶ 1 → A is mapped by ˆf to the constant map 1 → [ X, Y ] at y. This means exactly that ˆf ∶ A → [ X, Y ]∗ preserves the basepoints.Thus, every pointed map out of the smash product corresponds to a unique pointed map into the internal hom, completing the proof that [1, C] is a closed monoidal category. This completes the proof of Lemma 2.1. 38 C.2 Proof of Lemma 5.2. 

Claim (i). Assume C has limits of shape J. Let F ∶ J → [ 1 ; C] be a diagram. We want to construct the limit of F in [1 ; C] . Applying the forgetful functor gives a diagram Frgt ○F ∶ J → C . Since C has limits of type J, this diagram has a limit L ∶= lim (U ○ F ) in C. This limit comes equipped with projection morphisms 

πj ∶ L → Xj for each j ∈ Ob (J). The objects in the original diagram F are of the form (Xj , x j ). Note that the collection of base-points xj ∶ 1 → Xj naturally forms a cone over the diagram U ○ F with vertex 1. By the universal property of the limit L in C, this cone induces a unique morphism u ∶ 1 → L such that for all j ∈ Ob (J) : πj ○ u = xj . This unique map u serves as the base-point for L, making (L, u ) an object in 

[1 ; C] . Furthermore, the equation πj ○u = xj explicitly proves that the projections πj are valid morphisms in 

[1 ; C] . To verify that (L, u ) is indeed the limit in [1 ; C] , we must check its universal property. Let (M, v )

be another object in [1 ; C] equipped with a cone over F , consisting of projections pj ∶ ( M, v ) → ( Xj , x j ).By definition, this means pj ○ v = xj for all j. The pj maps form a cone over U ○ F with vertex M in C. The universal property of L guarantees a unique morphism h ∶ M → L in C such that πj ○ h = pj . We now show that h is a valid morphism in [1 ; C] ; namely, that h ○ v = u. We can prove this by post-composing with the limit projections πj :

πj ○ ( h ○ v) = ( πj ○ h) ○ v = pj ○ v = xj .

This shows that the composition (h ○ v) is a morphism 1 → L that mediates the cone xj . However, u was defined as the unique morphism satisfying πj ○ u = xj . Therefore, it must be exactly true that h ○ v = u.

Claim (ii). If J is connected, for any two objects j, k ∈ Ob (J), there is a zig-zag of morphisms connecting them. Because F is a valid diagram in [1 ; C] , every morphism F (α) preserves the base-point: F (α)○ xj = xk.The underlying colimit C in C with coprojections ιj guarantees that: 

ιk ○ F (α) = ιj .

By substituting the base-point condition, we get : 

ιk ○ xk = ιk ○ ( F (α) ○ xj ) = ( ιk ○ F (α)) ○ xj = ιj ○ xj

Because J is connected, this equality cascades across the entire diagram. All the compositions ιj ○ xj are exactly the same morphism. This single, unique morphism serves as the canonical base-point u ∶ 1 → C.

Claim (iii). The proof follows similarly to Claim (ii). 

## C.3 Proof of Theorem 3. This completes the proof of Theorem 3. 

## C.4 Proof of Lemma 6.1. First note that (20) yields graph T (h−1 

> i

∣μi) ○ μ3 = graph T (h−1 

> i

∣μi) ○ hi ○ μi = graph (hi) ○ μi, i = 1, 2. (45) 

[( h−11 ∣μ1) ⊗ ( h−12 ∣μ2)] ○ copy ιΩ3 ○μ3 = [ ιΩ1 ⊗ ( h−12 ∣μ2)] ○ [( h−11 ∣μ1) ⊗ ιΩ3] ○ copy ιΩ3 ○μ3

= [ ιΩ1 ⊗ ( h−12 ∣μ2)] ○ graph T (h−11 ∣μ1) ○ μ3 = [ ιΩ1 ⊗ ( h−12 ∣μ2)] ○ graph (h1) ○ μ1, by (45) 

= [ ιΩ1 ⊗ ( h−12 ∣μ2)] ○ [ ιΩ1 ⊗ h1] ○ copy ιΩ1 ○μ1

We need to show that 

[ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ ιΦt

> 2

] ○ j(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2) = j(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2).

39 This can be derived as follows : 

[ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ ιΦt

> 2

] ○ j(μ1, μ 2 ∣ h1, h 2) = [ ιΦt 

> 1

⊗ ιΦt

> 2

] ○ [( h−11 ∣μ1) ⊗ ( h−12 ∣μ2)] ○ copy Ω3 ○μ3

This completes the proof of Lemma 6.1. 

## C.5 Proof of Lemma 6.2. This completes the proof of Lemma 6.2. 

## C.6 Proof of Lemma 6.4. We need to show that 

(i) [ ιΦt 

> 3

⊗ ιΦt

> 3

] ○ [( h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ] = ( h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ; (ii ) πi ○ [( h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ] = μ3, i = 1, 2.

The identity (i) is derived as follows 

[ιΦt 

> 3

⊗ ιΦt

> 3

] ○ [( h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ] = [( ιΦt 

> 3

○ h1) ⊗ ( ιΦt 

> 3

○ h2)] ○ λ = [( h1 ○ ιΦt

> 1

) ⊗ ( h1 ○ ιΦt

> 2

)] ○ λ

= ( h1 ⊗ h2) ○ [ ιΦt 

> 1

○ ιΦt

> 2

] ○ λ = ( h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ. 

To derive (ii) note that by (9) 

πi ○ [( h1 ⊗ h2) ○ λ] = πi ○ copy (h1 ○ λ, h 2 ○ λ) = hi ○ λ = μi.

This leads to the diagram Ω1 Ω3

1 Ω1 ⊗ Ω2 Ω3 ⊗ Ω3

Ω2 Ω3 

> h1
> μ2
> μ1
> λh1⊗h2
> π1
> π2
> π1
> π2
> h2

This diagram can be expanded using the dynamics Φ t 

> 3

⊗ Φt 

> 3

to get Ω1

Ω1 Ω3 Ω3

1 Ω1 ⊗ Ω2 Ω3 ⊗ Ω3 Ω3 ⊗ Ω3

Ω2 Ω3 Ω3

Ω2   

> h1Φt
> 1
> h1Φt
> 3
> μ1
> μ2
> μ2
> μ1
> λh1⊗h2
> π1
> π2
> π1
> π2
> Φt
> 3⊗Φt
> 3
> π1
> π2
> Φt
> 2
> h2Φt
> 3
> h1

This completes the proof of Lemma 6.4. 

## C.7 Proof of Lemma 6.5. This completes the proof of Lemma 6.5. 40 C.8 Proof of Lemma 6.6. Let η ∶ ψ ⇒ X be the colimiting cone. Fix any time t ∈ T . Because of the commutation assumed in the statement, 

F (j)t ∶ ψ(j) → ψ(j), ∀t ∈ T .

∀

jj′ 

> h

∈ J ∶

ψ(j) ψ(j)

ψ(j′) ψ(j′)  

> ψ(h)
> F(j)t
> ψ(h)
> F(j′)t

∀

jj′ 

> h

∈ J ∶

ψ(j) ψ(j)

ψ(j′) ψ(j′)

X X  

> ηj
> ψ(h)
> F(j)t
> ηj
> ψ(h)
> ηj′
> F(j′)t
> ηj′
> ∃! ¯Φt

This completes the proof of Lemma 6.6. 

## C.9 Proof of identity (31) . For every i = 1, 3 : 

πi ○ [ λ1,2 ○ λ2,3] = πi ○ [ E(X1∣X2, λ 1,2) ⊗ E(X3∣X2, λ 2,3)] ○ copy (2) 

> X2

○μ2 = E(Xi∣X2, λ 2,i ) ○ μ2

= π(i, 2) 

> i

○ ( π(i, 2)− 12 ∣μ2) ○ μ2, by (39) ,

= μi, by (41) .

This completes the proof of (31). 

## D Ergodic extensions. D.1 Proof of Lemma 8.2. This completes the proof of Lemma 8.2. 41 D.2 Proof of Theorem 6. 

⊗∣J+t+s∣X ⊗∣J+t∣X ⊗∣J∣X

⊗∣T ∣ X ⊗∣T ∣ X

⊗∣J′+t+s∣X ⊗∣J′+t∣X ⊗∣J′∣X

+s +t

+( t+s)

πJ+t+s

πJ′+t πJ′+t

πJ+t

shift s shift t

πJ′

πJ

shift t+s

πJ′+t+s→J+t+s πJ′+t→J+t

+sπJ′→J

+t

+( t+s)

⊗∣J+t∣X ⊗∣J∣X

⊗∣T ∣ X ⊗∣T ∣ X

⊗∣J′+t∣X 1 ⊗∣J′∣X

πJ′+t

πJ+t

πJ′

πJ

shift t

πJ′+t→J+t

⊗∣J′∣μ

⊗∣T ∣ μ

⊗∣J∣μπJ′→J

⊗∣J+t∣X ⊗∣J∣X

⊗∣T ∣ X ⊗∣T ∣ X

⊗∣J′+t∣X 1 ⊗∣J′∣X

πJ′+t

πJ+t

πJ′

πJ

shift t

πJ′+t→J+t

⊗∣J′∣μ

⊗∣T ∣ μ

⊗∣J∣μ

⊗∣T ∣ μ

⊗∣J′+t∣μ

⊗∣J+t∣μπJ′→J

This completes the proof of Theorem 6. 

## D.3 Proof of Theorem 10. Let c ∶ X → Y be f -invariant and deterministic. Then, c defines a morphism c ∶ ( X, f, μ ) → ( Y, 1Y , c ○ μ). The assumption implies 42 =1X cμμ c ○ μ

Therefore, we have = =1Y 1Y

cμc cμc ○ μ c ○ μ

Thus c ○ μ is deterministic. (2) Let λ be a joining. Then, by the invariance and Birkhoff property, we have = =1X 1Y

λf n 1Y

λμ ν

This completes the proof of Theorem 10. 

## References. 

[1] K. Cho and B. Jacobs. Disintegration and bayesian inversion via string diagrams. Math. Struct. Comp. Sci. , 29(7):938–971, 2019. [2] T. Fritz. A synthetic approach to Markov kernels, conditional independence and theorems on sufficient statistics. Adv. Math. , 370:107239, 2020. [3] Tobias Fritz and Wendong Liang. Free gs-monoidal categories and free markov categories. Applied Categorical Structures , 31(2), 2023. 43 [4] M. Mrozek. Leray functor and cohomological Conley index for discrete dynamical systems. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. , 318(1):149–178, 1990. [5] J. Robbin and D. Salamon. Lyapunov maps, simplicial complexes and the Stone functor. Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys. , 12(1):153–183, 1992. [6] D. Vagner, D. Spivak, and E. Lerman. Algebras of open dynamical systems on the operad of wiring diagrams. Theory Appl. Categories , 30:1793–1822, 2015. [7] D. Spivak. The steady states of coupled dynamical systems compose according to matrix arithmetic, 2015. [8] S. Das and T. Suda. Dynamics, data and reconstruction. Siam J. Appl. Dyn. , 25, 2026. [9] S. Das and T. Suda. Dynamical systems as enriched functors. arxiv , 2509, 2025. [10] A. Jamneshan and T. Tao. Foundational aspects of uncountable measure theory: Gelfand duality, Riesz representation, canonical models, and canonical disintegration. Letters in Mathematical Physics ,112(5):100, 2022. [11] Asgar Jamneshan. An uncountable furstenberg–zimmer structure theory. Ergodic Theory and Dynam-ical Systems , 43(7):2404–2436, 2023. [12] Asgar Jamneshan and Terence Tao. An uncountable Mackey–Zimmer theorem. Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 152:141–210, 2024. [13] T. Suda. A categorical view of poincar´ e maps and suspension flows. Dynamical Systems , 37(1):159–179, 2022. [14] S. Moss and P. Perrone. A category-theoretic proof of the ergodic decomposition theorem. Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys. , 2022. [15] T. Suda. Dynamical properties in the axiomatic theory of ordinary differential equations. J. Diff. Eq. ,391:1–24, 2024. [16] T. Fritz and E. Rischel. Infinite products and zero-one laws in categorical probability. Compositionality ,2, 2020. [17] Tobias Fritz, Tom´ aˇ s Gonda, and Paolo Perrone. De Finetti’s theorem in categorical probability. Journal of Theoretical Probability , 34(3):1585–1639, 2021. [18] Eli Glasner, Jean-Paul Thouvenot, and Benjamin Weiss. Entropy theory without a past. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 20(5):1355–1370, 2000. [19] Benjamin Weiss. Strictly ergodic models for dynamical systems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society , 13(2):143–146, 1985. [20] M. Lema´ nczyk et al. Gaussian automorphisms whose ergodic self-joinings are Gaussian. Fund. Math. ,164(3):253–293, 2000. [21] T. de La Rue. An introduction to joinings in ergodic theory. Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst. , 15:121–142, 2006. [22] M. Doob. Stochastic processes . Wiley, 1953. 44 [23] Robert Dawson, Robert Par´ e, and Dorette Pronk. The span construction. Theory and Applications of Categories , 13(9):131–185, 2004. [24] Robert J. MacG. Dawson, Robert Par´ e, and Dorette A. Pronk. Universal properties of span. Theory and Applications of Categories , 13(4):61–85, 2004. [25] Tobias Heindel and Pawe l Soboci´ nski. Being van kampen is a universal property. Logical Methods in Computer Science , 7(1):1–22, 2011. [26] E. Glasner. Ergodic theory via joinings . Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. Amer. Math. Soc., 2015. [27] D. Stein. Random variables, conditional independence and categories of abstract sample spaces. In 

2025 40th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS) , pages 472–484. IEEE, 2025. [28] N. Ensarguet and P. Perrone. Categorical probability spaces, ergodic decompositions, and transitions to equilibrium. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04267 , 2023. [29] D. Braithwaite et al. The compositional structure of bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06112 , 2023. [30] K. Kamiya and J. Welliaveetil. A category theory framework for bayesian learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.14293 , 2021. [31] D. Rudolph. An example of a measure preserving map with minimal self-joinings, and applications. 

Journal d’analyse mathematique , 35(1):97–122, 1979. [32] C. Villani. Optimal Transport: Old and New , volume 338 of Grundlehren der mathematischen Wis-senschaften . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009. [33] C´ edric Villani. Topics in optimal transportation , volume 58. American Mathematical Soc., 2021. [34] P. Perrone. Markov categories and entropy. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 70:1671–1692, 2024. [35] Eli Glasner and Benjamin Weiss. Entropy theory without a past. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 23(5):1475–1480, 2003. [36] H. Furstenberg. Disjointness in ergodic theory, minimal sets, and a problem in diophantine approxi-mation. Th. Comp. Sys. , 1(1):1–49, 1967. [37] H. Furstenberg. Ergodic behavior of diagonal measures and a theorem of Szemer´ edi on arithmetic progressions. Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 31(1):204–256, 1977. [38] A. Dooley and A. Quas. Approximate transitivity for zero-entropy systems. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 25(2):443–453, 2005. [39] E. Glasner and B. Weiss. Quasi-factors of zero entropy systems. Journal of the American Mathematical Society , 8(3):665–686, 1995. [40] F. Blanchard and Y. Lacroix. Zero entropy factors of topological flows. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 119(3):985–992, 1993. 45 [41] A. Del Junco. Transformations with discrete spectrum are stacking transformations. Canadian Journal of Mathematics , 28:836–839, 1976. [42] M. Haase and N. Moriakov. On systems with quasi-discrete spectrum. Studia Mathematica , 241:173– 199, 2018. [43] E. Glasner. On the existence of isometric extensions. American J. Math. , 100(6):1185–1212, 1978. [44] N. Chernov and C. Haskell. Nonuniformly hyperbolic K-systems are Bernoulli. Erg. th. dyn. sys. ,16(1):19–44, 1996. [45] Jean-Paul Thouvenot. Some properties and applications of joinings in ergodic theory. In Karl E. Petersen and Ibrahim Salama, editors, Ergodic Theory and Harmonic Analysis , volume 205 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series , pages 207–235. Cambridge University Press, 1995. [46] T. Fritz and A. Klingler. The d-separation criterion in categorical probability. J. Machine Learning Research , 24(46):1–49, 2023. [47] J. Barmak, M. Mrozek, and T. Wanner. Conley index for multivalued maps on finite topological spaces. 

Foundations of Computational Mathematics , 26(2):647–687, 2026. [48] C. Conley. Isolated invariant sets and the Morse index . 38. Amer. Math. Soc., 1978. [49] J. Robbin and D. Salamon. Dynamical systems, shape theory and the Conley index. Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys. , 8(Charles Conley Memorial Issue):375–393, 1988. [50] A. Szymczak. The Conley index for discrete semidynamical systems. Topology Appli. , 66(3):215–240, 1995. [51] J. Franks and D. Richeson. Shift equivalence and the Conley index. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. ,352(7):3305–3322, 2000. [52] T. Kaczynski and M. Mrozek. Conley index for discrete multi-valued dynamical systems. Topology and its Applications , 65(1):83–96, 1995. [53] B. Batko and M. Mrozek. Weak index pairs and the conley index for discrete multivalued dynamical systems. SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Sys. , 15(2):1143–1162, 2016. [54] B. Batko. Weak index pairs and the Conley index for discrete multivalued dynamical systems - ii:. 

SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Sys. , 16(3):1587–1617, 2017. [55] B. Batko. The Morse equation in the Conley index theory for discrete multivalued dynamical systems. 

J. Dyn. Diff. Eq. , 35(3):2725–2742, 2023. [56] K. Stolot. Homotopy Conley index for discrete multivalued dynamical systems. Topology Appl/ ,153(18):3528–3545, 2006. [57] S´ ebastien Ferenczi. Systems of finite rank. Colloq. Math. , 73(1):35–65, 1997. [58] M. Nadkarni. The spectral theorem for unitary operators . Springer Science and Business Media, 1998. [59] M. Nadkarni. Basic Ergodic Theory . Birkh¨ auser Advanced Texts Basler Lehrb¨ ucher. Springer Basel, 3rd edition, 2011. [60] J. King. A map with topological minimal self-joinings in the sense of del junco. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 10(4):745–761, 1990. 46 [61] V. Ryzhikov. Mixing, rank and minimal self-joining of actions with an invariant measure. Russian Academy of Sciences. Sbornik Mathematics , 75(2):405–427, 1993. [62] Vladimir A. Rokhlin. On endomorphisms of compact commutative groups. Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR. Seriya Matematicheskaya , 13(4):329–340, 1949. [63] Benjamin Weiss. Multiple recurrence and doubly minimal systems. In Topological Dynamics and Ap-plications , volume 215 of Contemporary Mathematics , pages 189–196. American Mathematical Society, 1998. [64] E. Glasner. Some properties and applications of joinings in ergodic theory. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 14(4):729–740, 1994. [65] Donald S. Ornstein. On the root problem in ergodic theory. In Proceedings of the Sixth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Volume 2: Probability Theory , volume 2, pages 347–356, Berkeley, CA, 1972. University of California Press. [66] J. King. Joining-rank and the structure of finite rank mixing transformations. Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 51:182–227, 1988. [67] Rafael V. Chacon. Weakly mixing transformations which are not strongly mixing. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 22(3):559–562, 1969. [68] Andres del Junco, Maurice Rahe, and Laif Swanson. Chacon’s automorphism has minimal self-joinings. 

Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 37:276–284, 1980. [69] William A. Veech. A criterion for a process to be prime. Monatshefte f¨ ur Mathematik , 94(4):335–341, 1982. [70] Andres del Junco and Daniel J. Rudolph. On ergodic actions whose self-joinings are graphs. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 7(4):531–557, 1987. [71] T. Fritz, T. Gonda, and P. Perrone. De finetti’s theorem in categorical probability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02639 , 2021. 

## References. 

[1] K. Cho and B. Jacobs. Disintegration and bayesian inversion via string diagrams. Math. Struct. Comp. Sci. , 29(7):938–971, 2019. [2] T. Fritz. A synthetic approach to Markov kernels, conditional independence and theorems on sufficient statistics. Adv. Math. , 370:107239, 2020. [3] Tobias Fritz and Wendong Liang. Free gs-monoidal categories and free markov categories. Applied Categorical Structures , 31(2), 2023. [4] M. Mrozek. Leray functor and cohomological Conley index for discrete dynamical systems. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. , 318(1):149–178, 1990. [5] J. Robbin and D. Salamon. Lyapunov maps, simplicial complexes and the Stone functor. Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys. , 12(1):153–183, 1992. 47 [6] D. Vagner, D. Spivak, and E. Lerman. Algebras of open dynamical systems on the operad of wiring diagrams. Theory Appl. Categories , 30:1793–1822, 2015. [7] D. Spivak. The steady states of coupled dynamical systems compose according to matrix arithmetic, 2015. [8] S. Das and T. Suda. Dynamics, data and reconstruction. Siam J. Appl. Dyn. , 25, 2026. [9] S. Das and T. Suda. Dynamical systems as enriched functors. arxiv , 2509, 2025. [10] A. Jamneshan and T. Tao. Foundational aspects of uncountable measure theory: Gelfand duality, Riesz representation, canonical models, and canonical disintegration. Letters in Mathematical Physics ,112(5):100, 2022. [11] Asgar Jamneshan. An uncountable furstenberg–zimmer structure theory. Ergodic Theory and Dynam-ical Systems , 43(7):2404–2436, 2023. [12] Asgar Jamneshan and Terence Tao. An uncountable Mackey–Zimmer theorem. Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 152:141–210, 2024. [13] T. Suda. A categorical view of poincar´ e maps and suspension flows. Dynamical Systems , 37(1):159–179, 2022. [14] S. Moss and P. Perrone. A category-theoretic proof of the ergodic decomposition theorem. Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys. , 2022. [15] T. Suda. Dynamical properties in the axiomatic theory of ordinary differential equations. J. Diff. Eq. ,391:1–24, 2024. [16] T. Fritz and E. Rischel. Infinite products and zero-one laws in categorical probability. Compositionality ,2, 2020. [17] Tobias Fritz, Tom´ aˇ s Gonda, and Paolo Perrone. De Finetti’s theorem in categorical probability. Journal of Theoretical Probability , 34(3):1585–1639, 2021. [18] Eli Glasner, Jean-Paul Thouvenot, and Benjamin Weiss. Entropy theory without a past. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 20(5):1355–1370, 2000. [19] Benjamin Weiss. Strictly ergodic models for dynamical systems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society , 13(2):143–146, 1985. [20] M. Lema´ nczyk et al. Gaussian automorphisms whose ergodic self-joinings are Gaussian. Fund. Math. ,164(3):253–293, 2000. [21] T. de La Rue. An introduction to joinings in ergodic theory. Discrete Contin. Dyn. Syst. , 15:121–142, 2006. [22] M. Doob. Stochastic processes . Wiley, 1953. [23] Robert Dawson, Robert Par´ e, and Dorette Pronk. The span construction. Theory and Applications of Categories , 13(9):131–185, 2004. [24] Robert J. MacG. Dawson, Robert Par´ e, and Dorette A. Pronk. Universal properties of span. Theory and Applications of Categories , 13(4):61–85, 2004. 48 [25] Tobias Heindel and Pawe l Soboci´ nski. Being van kampen is a universal property. Logical Methods in Computer Science , 7(1):1–22, 2011. [26] E. Glasner. Ergodic theory via joinings . Mathematical Surveys and Monographs. Amer. Math. Soc., 2015. [27] D. Stein. Random variables, conditional independence and categories of abstract sample spaces. In 

2025 40th Annual ACM/IEEE Symposium on Logic in Computer Science (LICS) , pages 472–484. IEEE, 2025. [28] N. Ensarguet and P. Perrone. Categorical probability spaces, ergodic decompositions, and transitions to equilibrium. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.04267 , 2023. [29] D. Braithwaite et al. The compositional structure of bayesian inference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.06112 , 2023. [30] K. Kamiya and J. Welliaveetil. A category theory framework for bayesian learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.14293 , 2021. [31] D. Rudolph. An example of a measure preserving map with minimal self-joinings, and applications. 

Journal d’analyse mathematique , 35(1):97–122, 1979. [32] C. Villani. Optimal Transport: Old and New , volume 338 of Grundlehren der mathematischen Wis-senschaften . Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009. [33] C´ edric Villani. Topics in optimal transportation , volume 58. American Mathematical Soc., 2021. [34] P. Perrone. Markov categories and entropy. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory , 70:1671–1692, 2024. [35] Eli Glasner and Benjamin Weiss. Entropy theory without a past. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 23(5):1475–1480, 2003. [36] H. Furstenberg. Disjointness in ergodic theory, minimal sets, and a problem in diophantine approxi-mation. Th. Comp. Sys. , 1(1):1–49, 1967. [37] H. Furstenberg. Ergodic behavior of diagonal measures and a theorem of Szemer´ edi on arithmetic progressions. Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 31(1):204–256, 1977. [38] A. Dooley and A. Quas. Approximate transitivity for zero-entropy systems. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 25(2):443–453, 2005. [39] E. Glasner and B. Weiss. Quasi-factors of zero entropy systems. Journal of the American Mathematical Society , 8(3):665–686, 1995. [40] F. Blanchard and Y. Lacroix. Zero entropy factors of topological flows. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 119(3):985–992, 1993. [41] A. Del Junco. Transformations with discrete spectrum are stacking transformations. Canadian Journal of Mathematics , 28:836–839, 1976. [42] M. Haase and N. Moriakov. On systems with quasi-discrete spectrum. Studia Mathematica , 241:173– 199, 2018. [43] E. Glasner. On the existence of isometric extensions. American J. Math. , 100(6):1185–1212, 1978. 49 [44] N. Chernov and C. Haskell. Nonuniformly hyperbolic K-systems are Bernoulli. Erg. th. dyn. sys. ,16(1):19–44, 1996. [45] Jean-Paul Thouvenot. Some properties and applications of joinings in ergodic theory. In Karl E. Petersen and Ibrahim Salama, editors, Ergodic Theory and Harmonic Analysis , volume 205 of London Mathematical Society Lecture Note Series , pages 207–235. Cambridge University Press, 1995. [46] T. Fritz and A. Klingler. The d-separation criterion in categorical probability. J. Machine Learning Research , 24(46):1–49, 2023. [47] J. Barmak, M. Mrozek, and T. Wanner. Conley index for multivalued maps on finite topological spaces. 

Foundations of Computational Mathematics , 26(2):647–687, 2026. [48] C. Conley. Isolated invariant sets and the Morse index . 38. Amer. Math. Soc., 1978. [49] J. Robbin and D. Salamon. Dynamical systems, shape theory and the Conley index. Erg. Th. Dyn. Sys. , 8(Charles Conley Memorial Issue):375–393, 1988. [50] A. Szymczak. The Conley index for discrete semidynamical systems. Topology Appli. , 66(3):215–240, 1995. [51] J. Franks and D. Richeson. Shift equivalence and the Conley index. Trans. Amer. Math. Soc. ,352(7):3305–3322, 2000. [52] T. Kaczynski and M. Mrozek. Conley index for discrete multi-valued dynamical systems. Topology and its Applications , 65(1):83–96, 1995. [53] B. Batko and M. Mrozek. Weak index pairs and the conley index for discrete multivalued dynamical systems. SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Sys. , 15(2):1143–1162, 2016. [54] B. Batko. Weak index pairs and the Conley index for discrete multivalued dynamical systems - ii:. 

SIAM J. Appl. Dyn. Sys. , 16(3):1587–1617, 2017. [55] B. Batko. The Morse equation in the Conley index theory for discrete multivalued dynamical systems. 

J. Dyn. Diff. Eq. , 35(3):2725–2742, 2023. [56] K. Stolot. Homotopy Conley index for discrete multivalued dynamical systems. Topology Appl/ ,153(18):3528–3545, 2006. [57] S´ ebastien Ferenczi. Systems of finite rank. Colloq. Math. , 73(1):35–65, 1997. [58] M. Nadkarni. The spectral theorem for unitary operators . Springer Science and Business Media, 1998. [59] M. Nadkarni. Basic Ergodic Theory . Birkh¨ auser Advanced Texts Basler Lehrb¨ ucher. Springer Basel, 3rd edition, 2011. [60] J. King. A map with topological minimal self-joinings in the sense of del junco. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 10(4):745–761, 1990. [61] V. Ryzhikov. Mixing, rank and minimal self-joining of actions with an invariant measure. Russian Academy of Sciences. Sbornik Mathematics , 75(2):405–427, 1993. [62] Vladimir A. Rokhlin. On endomorphisms of compact commutative groups. Izvestiya Akademii Nauk SSSR. Seriya Matematicheskaya , 13(4):329–340, 1949. 50 [63] Benjamin Weiss. Multiple recurrence and doubly minimal systems. In Topological Dynamics and Ap-plications , volume 215 of Contemporary Mathematics , pages 189–196. American Mathematical Society, 1998. [64] E. Glasner. Some properties and applications of joinings in ergodic theory. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 14(4):729–740, 1994. [65] Donald S. Ornstein. On the root problem in ergodic theory. In Proceedings of the Sixth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability, Volume 2: Probability Theory , volume 2, pages 347–356, Berkeley, CA, 1972. University of California Press. [66] J. King. Joining-rank and the structure of finite rank mixing transformations. Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 51:182–227, 1988. [67] Rafael V. Chacon. Weakly mixing transformations which are not strongly mixing. Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society , 22(3):559–562, 1969. [68] Andres del Junco, Maurice Rahe, and Laif Swanson. Chacon’s automorphism has minimal self-joinings. 

Journal d’Analyse Math´ ematique , 37:276–284, 1980. [69] William A. Veech. A criterion for a process to be prime. Monatshefte f¨ ur Mathematik , 94(4):335–341, 1982. [70] Andres del Junco and Daniel J. Rudolph. On ergodic actions whose self-joinings are graphs. Ergodic Theory and Dynamical Systems , 7(4):531–557, 1987. [71] T. Fritz, T. Gonda, and P. Perrone. De finetti’s theorem in categorical probability. arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.02639 , 2021. 51