Title: Probing Exoplanetary Rings with Asterodensity Profiling: A PhotoRing Analysis of Kepler-51

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.25234v1

Published Time: Wed, 23 Sep 2026 00:17:34 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
> Draft version September 23, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

Probing Exoplanetary Rings with Asterodensity Profiling: A PhotoRing Analysis of Kepler-51 

Jorge I. Zuluaga, 1 Sebasti´ an Numpaque, 1 David Kipping, 2 and Jaime A. Alvarado-Montes 3, 4, ∗

> 1SEAP/FACom, Instituto de F´ ısica - FCEN, Universidad de Antioquia, Calle 70 No. 52-21, Medell´ ın, Colombia.
> 2Columbia University, 550 W 120th Street, New York NY 10027
> 3Australian Astronomical Optics, Macquarie University, Balaclava Road, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.
> 4Astrophysics and Space Technologies Research Centre, Macquarie University, Balaclava Road, Sydney, NSW 2109, Australia.

ABSTRACT The Kepler-51 system hosts transiting super-puff planets whose extremely low bulk densities chal-lenge structural models, possibly because unresolved rings inflate their inferred radii. We test this hypothesis by combining asterodensity profiling with TTV-aware transit fits of Kepler long-cadence photometry. For Kepler-51b we measure a density ratio Ψ ≡ ρ⋆, obs /ρ ⋆, true = 1 .18 ± 0.06, a 2 .9σ offset from Ψ = 1; for Kepler-51d we find Ψ = 1 .04 ± 0.08 (0 .6σ), consistent with no anomaly. Unmodelled eccentricity is disfavoured for planet b by TTV-derived dynamical constraints ( p = 0 .007) but remains viable for planet d ( p = 0 .33). The offset of Kepler-51b is also compatible with the PhotoRing (PR) effect of unmodeled rings. Using a geometric ringed-transit forward model and Bayesian retrieval, we identify ring configurations that reproduce the transit observables and the measured density ratios. The preferred solutions are consistent with compact, moderately inclined rings that raise the true bulk densities by factors of 2–5. Conversely, the absence of a large PR offset excludes extended, optically thick, high-obliquity rings at 99% credibility for b and 70% for d from archival photometry alone. These objects may thus be “puff ringed planets” although recent JWST observations of Kepler-51d show no direct signature of an opaque ring. While the required impact parameters and stellar densities show tension with independent constraints—attributable to Kepler’s 30-minute cadence—this study presents the first complete application of the PR effect, offered as a methodological demonstration and exclusion experiment rather than as evidence that rings are present. All code is publicly available to support applications to other systems. 

Keywords: Exoplanet rings (494) — Transit photometry (1709) — Stellar properties (1624) — Monte Carlo methods (2238) 

1. INTRODUCTION Several findings support the hypothesis that planetary rings are not exclusive to our Solar System but a nat-ural outcome of possibly all planetary systems. In the Solar System, all four giant planets possess ring systems (S. Charnoz et al. 2009) linked to tidal disruption of satellites, collisions among moonlets, or residual debris from planetary formation. More recently, the confirma-tion of rings around small bodies such as Chariklo (F. Braga-Ribas et al. 2014), Quaoar (B. E. Morgado et al. 2023), Chiron (J. L. Ortiz et al. 2023), and the dwarf planet Haumea (J. L. Ortiz et al. 2017) suggests that ring formation can occur under a wide variety of physical conditions, raising more questions about how planetary  

> ∗Macquarie University Research Fellow (MQRF)

rings are born and how they evolve. Still, exoplanetary rings (‘exorings’ for short) remain undiscovered among the thousands of confirmed extrasolar planets. Their de-tection represents a unique opportunity to explore and provide new constraints on formation and evolution of planetary systems. Early theoretical investigations demonstrated that Saturn-like ring systems could produce detectable signa-tures ( ≤ 100 ppm) in transit photometry (J. W. Barnes & J. J. Fortney 2004), especially during ingress and egress. However, although systematic searches for these signals in Kepler and TESS data have been conducted over the years (M. Z. Heising et al. 2015; M. Aizawa et al. 2018; T. Umetani et al. 2025a), no unambiguous detections of rings around transiting exoplanets have yet been confirmed (T. M. Brown et al. 2001; N. C. Santos et al. 2015; H. P. Osborn et al. 2017; F. J. Ballesteros arXiv:2609.25234v1 [astro-ph.EP] 21 Sep 2026 2et al. 2018; A. Lecavelier des Etangs et al. 2017; B. Akin-sanmi et al. 2020). In practice, an obscuring structure around 1SWASP J140747b is presently considered the only confirmed exoring case (E. E. Mamajek et al. 2012; M. A. Kenworthy & E. E. Mamajek 2015). However, given how young the system is, these “rings” are most likely composed of dust and gas and probably represent the remains of a circumplanetary disc, rather than debris from previous tidal interactions or moon disruptions. Exorings could also be detected via modern high-contrast imaging techniques (K. B. Follette 2023) or reflected-light photometry (L. Arnold & J. Schneider 2004; M. Sucerquia et al. 2020; J. I. Zuluaga et al. 2022) and polarimetry (A. K. Veenstra et al. 2025). However, because these techniques are still limited, most studies have concentrated on identifying their distinctive im-prints in stellar light curves, which change according to their orientation, radial extent, and optical depth (see eg. Y. Ohta et al. 2009; J. I. Zuluaga et al. 2015). The most salient effect of an exoring on a transit light-curve arises from the fact that the occulting area of a ringless planet can be significantly smaller than that of a ringed planet. If rings are not included in the transit model of the latter, the planetary radius will be overes-timated (see e.g., J. I. Zuluaga et al. 2015). This would result in the bulk density being underestimated, which in turn could cause the planet to be incorrectly identified as an unusually low-density, “puffed” planet (G. Bakos et al. 2007). In extreme cases, exorings could explain the anomalous densities of the so-called “super-puffs” or su-per puff planets ( ρ < 0.1 g/cm 3, see eg. E. J. Lee & E. Chiang 2016), bodies with radii comparable to those of gas giants but only a few times the mass of Earth. The planetary system Kepler-51 contains some of the most striking examples of so-called super-puff planets. This compact, multi-planet system hosts at least three transiting planets—Kepler-51b, Kepler-51c, and Kepler-51d—with sizes between those of Neptune and Saturn, whose masses have been inferred from transit-timing variation (TTV) analyses (K. Masuda 2014). With esti-mated masses of 5–6 M⊕, these planets are formally cat-egorized as super-Earths. Their radii, however, are on the order of 6–10 R⊕, comparable to gas giants, which results in extremely low mean densities of ρ < 0.06 g cm −3. As a consequence, they are currently the least dense—and thus the most extremely inflated—planets known. More recently, a fourth planet, Kepler-51 e, has been suggested (K. Masuda et al. 2024). Its presence is inferred indirectly, and its characteristics are conse-quently less well determined than those of the other planets in the system. Several physical processes have been suggested to ex-plain the extremely low densities and inflated radii of the Kepler-51 planets, including extended H-He envelopes, atmospheric escape and the possibility that they are still at a relatively early evolutionary stage (see, e.g., J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. 2020; L. Wang & F. Dai 2019). Recent JWST observations of Kepler-51d, how-ever, show, on the one hand, no significant photometric signature indicative of an equatorial bulge or a large opaque ring system (C. Lammers & J. N. Winn 2024), and, on the other hand, a sloped transmission spectrum (J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. 2025) that strongly supports the presence of a high-altitude haze layer, rendering the existence of a massive, opaque exoring highly unlikely. While an optically thin, very porous ring around Kepler-51d cannot be entirely excluded, prior theoretical work has already shown that standard rocky rings struggle to account for the extreme sizes of the Kepler-51 planets without assuming exceptionally porous material (A. L. Piro & S. Vissapragada 2020). In turn, the true nature of Kepler-51b remains unclear without further follow-up observations. Owing to this ongoing debate and their peculiar physical characteristics, the Kepler-51 planets serve as an excellent testing ground for the development and implementation of novel methods. In J. I. Zuluaga et al. (2015) (hereafter ZKSA2015), the so-called PhotoRing (PR) effect was introduced, a technique for identifying planetary rings even when tran-sit light curves lack prominent, well-resolved morpho-logical signatures. PR is part of the broader class of asterodensity profiling (AP) techniques (D. M. Kipping 2014, hereafter K2014). In AP, the mean stellar den-sity of the host star inferred from transit observables (the “observed density”)—namely the transit duration, depth, impact parameter, and orbital period— is com-pared with the bulk stellar density obtained from in-dependent stellar characterization methods (the “true density”), such as asteroseismology or stellar isochrone-fitting. When the transit signal is influenced by unmod-eled phenomena, such as stellar blending, orbital eccen-tricity, or the presence of planetary rings, the observed density will differ from the true density. Despite the potential of the PR effect and the commu-nity’s positive reception of the concept, the method has not yet been applied to real planetary systems (see eg. M. Z. Heising et al. 2015; A. L. Piro & S. Vissapragada 2020; S. C. Millholland & J. N. Winn 2025; T. Umetani et al. 2025b). With over a decade of accumulated ob-servations, Kepler-51 now emerges as an optimal target to test the method and help unravel the baffling prop-erties of its planets. To this end, we employ here PR to investigate whether the anomalous characteristics of 3the Kepler-51 planets can at least be partially explained due to the presence of planetary rings. We infer a stel-lar density from the Kepler transit light curves—among other transit observables—for each planet and compare it with an independent, isochrone-based estimate of the true stellar density (K. Masuda et al. 2024), searching for discrepancies indicative of the PR effect. We then ap-plied the geometric forward model for transiting ringed planets of ZKSA2015 to predict the effective transit ob-servables—namely, the transit depth δ and the durations 

T14 and T23 —as well as the corresponding ρ⋆, obs for a specified ring configuration. This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the observational data analysis, including our light-curve fit of the Kepler-51 planets. Section 3 compares the resulting transit-inferred stellar densities with in-dependent isochrone-based estimates, and Section 4 as-sesses whether unmodelled orbital eccentricity can ac-count for the measured offsets. Section 5 introduces the geometric forward model used to predict effective transit observables for ringed planets. Section 6 then sets out the asterodensity profiling framework and the 

PhotoRing effect. Section 7 details the Bayesian infer-ence methodology, including the likelihood construction and the treatment of nuisance parameters. Section 8 re-ports the results of our retrievals, detailing the inferred ring geometries and evaluating the model through pos-terior predictive checks. Section 9 discusses the physical implications of our findings and presents our concluding remarks.  

> 2.

OBSERVATIONAL DATA ANALYSIS The observational and data basis of this study is grounded in the posterior distributions of the asteroden-sity profiling observables. ( δ, ρ ⋆, obs , b obs ) for Kepler-51b and Kepler-51d, the innermost and outermost planets of Kepler-51, obtained from a dedicated light-curve fit of the available Kepler photometry (see subsection 2.1). These posteriors are not derived from a direct ring-transit model, they rather represent the inferences made under the standard assumption of a spherical, ringless planet, thus encoding the effective transit observables that must result from any ringed-planet configuration. In this section, we describe the origin of these pos-teriors and how they are incorporated into our ring-retrieval framework. Although more recent observations of the system have been obtained with JWST, HST, and TESS facilities (K. Masuda et al. 2024; C. Lammers & J. N. Winn 2024; J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. 2025), the present analysis exclusively relies on constraints derived from the original Kepler photometry, without includ-ing the aforementioned new datasets. This restriction is driven by two primary factors: first, to assess how effec-tively our analysis pipeline operates when only a limited amount of photometric data is available; and second, be-cause our team did not have access to the full data set for most of the duration of this study. Although we could, in principle, wait to obtain all existing photometric mea-surements of the system, we will demonstrate below that the main limitation on the use of AP effects is the pre-cise determination of ρ⋆,true , which has not been sig-nificantly improved by the more recent observations of the system. Nevertheless, as future measurements yield more accurate estimates of this parameter, the methods and tools presented here will prove highly valuable for addressing the puzzle at hand, particularly that posed by planet Kepler-51b (see section 4). 2.1. Transit and PhotoFIT Modeling 

For a robust inference of the transit parameters in the presence of TTVs, and without resorting to a full dy-namical analysis, we employed a so-called photometric fit with independent transit times (hereafter PhotoFIT). Enforcing a strict linear ephemeris on systems with sig-nificant TTVs can artificially smear the transit shape. In our PhotoFIT approach, the central transit time ( Tc)for each epoch is treated as an independent free parame-ter during the light curve fitting process. This decouples the transit’s photometric shape from the underlying or-bital dynamics, allowing us to accurately measure the geometric transit parameters while also extracting the individual transit epochs. For Kepler-51b and Kepler-51d, the asterodensity pro-filing posterior distributions were sampled using the nested sampling algorithm MultiNest (F. Feroz et al. 2009, 2019) applied to the Kepler photometric time se-ries 5. The analysis fits each transit simultaneously with our PhotoFIT model, extracting individual mid-transit times for each observed epoch while allowing to estimate the AP parameters from the full ensemble of transits. For Kepler-51d, the small number of observed tran-sits and the corresponding parameter space allowed a single nested-sampling run, yielding one posterior dis-tribution per parameter. For Kepler-51b, however, the large number of observed epochs translates into a high-dimensional parameter space—since each epoch contributes an individual mid-transit time as a free parameter—making a single nested-sampling run com-putationally intractable. To handle this high dimen-sionality, the full photometric time series was divided  

> 5We exclude the recently discovered fourth planet, Kepler-51 e, and Kepler-51c due to its grazing transit geometry (K. Masuda et al. 2024)

4into three independent temporal segments, each cover-ing a distinct subset of observed transits. A separate run was performed on each segment, producing its cor-responding posterior distributions for AP parameters. We then combine the resulting distributions into a sin-gle posterior by running a short Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampler that simultaneously draws from the three posterior distributions, treating them as statistically in-dependent constraints on the transit parameters. The resulting chain defines the final posterior of Kepler-51b used throughout this work. 2.2. Derived Observables 

For each planet, the main outputs of the PhotoFIT are joint posterior samples of the asterodensity profil-ing (AP, see section 6) parameters ( ρ⋆, obs , b obs , δ ), along with the orbital period P and the limb-darkening coeffi-cients. For clarity, Table 1 compiles the definitions of all quantities employed in this work. The meaning of each quantity and its function in the analysis are explained in the relevant sections (e.g., the ringed-planet param-eters of the forward model are introduced in section 5, the properties obtained from asterodensity profiling are specified in section 4, and so on). Assuming a ringless planet, these parameters capture all of the transit-geometry information encoded in the 

Kepler light curves. The secondary transit quantities (a/R ⋆)obs , T 14 , and T23 , which are needed for our AP analysis, are then deterministically obtained by invert-ing the relations given in K2014. Their posterior dis-tributions are derived directly from the same posterior samples, ensuring that the full covariance structure in-ferred from the photometry is preserved. In Figure 1, we show the marginal posterior distributions for the full set of observables ( ρ⋆, obs , δ, T 14 , T 23 , b obs , (a/R ⋆)obs ) for both Kepler-51b and Kepler-51d. Our results (shaded curves) are compared with those of other authors (see next section). For a specified set of ring parameters (p, f i, f e, i R, θ R, α ) and suitable choices of orbital and stellar properties ( P, b, ρ ⋆, true ), the geometrical forward model predicts the corresponding observable vector. The Bayesian inference on the ring parameters is subse-quently carried out by confronting this model prediction with the distribution derived from the light curves. This procedure represents the foundation of the PR analysis. 2.3. Literature Comparison 

The Kepler-51 system has been characterized by several independent photometric analyses spanning a decade: the confirmed three-planet architecture by K. Masuda (2014), the atmospheric characterization of 

Table 1. Summary of symbols and notation used through-out this work. Symbol Description 

Nuisance parameters of the forward model 

P Orbital period [hours] 

b Transit impact parameter [–] 

ρ⋆, true Independent stellar density [g cm −3]

Ringed planet parameters of the forward model 

p Rp/R ⋆, scaled true planetary radius [–] 

fi, f e Inner and outer ring radius [ p]

iR, θ R Projected ring inclination and tilt [deg] 

α exp( −τ ), Ring normal attenuation [–] 

τ Ring normal opacity [–] 

Derived parameters of the forward model 

(a/R ⋆)geo Geometric scaled semi-major axis[–] 

iorb Orbital inclination [deg] 

δgeo Geometric transit depth [ppm] 

T geo 14 Geometric total transit duration [hours] 

T geo 23 Geometric full transit duration [hours] 

Transit (photometric) observables 

δ Transit depth [ppm] 

T14 Total transit duration [hours] 

T23 Full-transit duration [hours] 

pobs Ringless-model scaled planetary radius [–] 

Asterodensity profiling derived properties 

(a/R ⋆)obs Scaled semi-major axis [–] 

ρ⋆, obs Transit-inferred stellar density [g cm −3]Ψ ρ⋆, obs /ρ ⋆, true , density anomaly [–] PR 10 log 10 Ψ, logarithmic PR scale [–] Θij (Ψ i/Ψj )2/3, Ratio of density anomalies [–] (multiplanet asterodensity profiling, MAP) 

Bayesian inference 

θ Ringed planet parameter vector 

η Nuisance parameters 

y Observable vector 

L Likelihood function ˆp(y) KDE estimate of PhotoFIT posterior 

J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020) and J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2025), and the refined dynamically re-analysis and discovery of a fourth non-transiting planet, Kepler-51e of K. Masuda et al. (2024). Since our goal 5    

> Figure 1. Marginal posterior distributions of the observables for Kepler-51b (top row) and Kepler-51d (bottom row). Those obtained from the PhotoFIT carried out in this work are shown as filled distributions. Vertical dashed lines and the accompanying labels indicate the median and the 68% credible interval for each marginal posterior. For comparison, literature estimates are depicted as normal distributions (unfilled curves) constructed from the published point values and their reported uncertainties; in the case of K. Masuda et al. (2024), a truncated normal distribution is used for the impact parameter bto respect its physical limits. Only those observables provided by each reference are plotted (for example, none of the literature sources report values for the flat-bottom duration T23 ).

is to obtain posterior distributions of the photometric transit observables that enter the asterodensity profiling and ring inference described later in this work, the com-parison between our PhotoFIT-derived posteriors and the literature values therefore serves two purposes: (i) to validate that our analysis recovers transit shapes consis-tent with independent measurements, and (ii) to iden-tify and explain genuine discrepancies that may arise from differences in data selection, dynamical assump-tions, or statistical frameworks. In Table 2, we sum-marize our PhotoFIT transit observables along with the corresponding literature values. A visual comparison of the values reported in the lit-erature with those derived in this work is presented in Figure 1. Because the posterior distributions of the ob-servables reported by other authors are not available, we assume in all cases that they follow Gaussian distribu-tions (unfilled curves). While our own posteriors demon-strate that observable distributions can substantially de-viate from normality, this assumption is made solely for comparative purposes and our inference pipeline does not use the exact shapes of the literature distributions. The transit depth δ is the most straightforward quan-tity to determine from the data. Table 2 and Fig-ure 1 reveal a pronounced scatter among published val-ues for both planets that is larger than the quoted un-certainties of the individual measurements. The most natural explanation for this spread is unocculted stel-lar activity , rather than any systematic issue in the light-curve fitting. This phenomenon was explicitly de-tected in the follow-up observations of Kepler-51d us-ing NIRspec, as reported by C. Lammers & J. N. Winn (2024). Kepler-51 is a young ( ∼500 Myr), magnetically active star whose evolving starspot distribution alters the apparent out-of-transit flux level, artificially increas-ing the measured transit depth if the spot contribution is not explicitly modeled. Since the spot covering frac-tion changes over the Kepler observing window, and our analysis does not apply a dedicated correction for stel-lar spots, the derived depths should be interpreted as an average over the star’s activity state across the dif-ferent epochs. This explains their agreement with the full span of literature values and supports the conclusion that the observed dispersion is predominantly caused by time-varying stellar activity, rather than by differences in analysis methodology. On the other hand, the impact parameter bobs is among the least constrained transit observables reported in the literature, with published estimates spanning a wide range for both planets. This behavior arises pri-marily from the limited temporal resolution of the Ke-pler long-cadence data ( ∼30 min), which is comparable to the ingress/egress durations of the planets. Conse-quently, this averages and smooths the slopes of those regions that contain most of the information used to constrain the transit chord geometry and, therefore, the impact parameter. This loss of geometric information makes bobs highly degenerate, which can only be effec-6

Table 2. Transit observables for Kepler-51b and Kepler-51d from this work (PhotoFIT posterior) and literature values.                                                                                                                         

> Observable Kepler-51b Kepler-51d Source
> p[R⋆(R⊕)] 0.07055 +0 .00026
> −0.00030 (6 .687 +0 .024
> −0.028 )0.09531 +0 .00082
> −0.00078 (9 .034 +0 .078
> −0.074 )This work (PhotoFIT) 0.07225 ±0.0003 (6 .83 ±0.13) 0.09857 ±0.00037 (9 .32 ±0.18) K. Masuda et al. (2024) 0.07414 0.00059
> −0.00061 (7 .1±0.3) 0.10141 0.00084
> −0.00085 (9 .7±0.5) K. Masuda (2014) 0.0689 ±0.0013 (6 .89 ±0.14) 0.0976 ±0.0009 (9 .46 ±0.16) J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020) –0.09682 ±0.00051 (9 .19 ±0.05) J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2025)
> δ[ppm] 4977 +36 .1
> −42 .19084 +156
> −149 This work (PhotoFIT) 5220 ±40 9710 ±70 K. Masuda et al. (2024) 5500 ±90 10280 ±170 K. Masuda (2014) 4750 ±180 9530 ±180 J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020) –9370 ±100 J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2025)
> T14 [h] 5.708 +0 .0238
> −0.0176 8.458 +0 .0377
> −0.036 This work (PhotoFIT) 5.754 ±0.02 8.402 ±0.029 K. Masuda et al. (2024)
> T23 [h] 4.939 +0 .0243
> −0.019 6.88 +0 .0686
> −0.0752 This work (PhotoFIT)
> bobs
> 0.1443 +0 .0551
> −0.0579 0.2696 +0 .0757
> −0.116 This work (PhotoFIT) 0.074 ±0.072 0.003 ±0.095 K. Masuda et al. (2024) 0.251 ±0.106 0.25 ±0.108 K. Masuda (2014) 0.22 ±0.16 0.19 ±0.145 J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020)
> a/R ⋆
> 64 .08 +0 .46
> −0.647 124 .8+2 .96
> −2.88 This work (PhotoFIT) 61 .5±1.35 124 .7±2.75 K. Masuda et al. (2024) 59 .7±2.9124 .9±3.8J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020) –124 .2±0.37 J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2025)

tively broken with higher-cadence observations—as in the JWST analysis of K. Masuda et al. (2024) that re-solves a nearly central value for Kepler-51d ( b ∼ 0.003). However, they also show that even with high-quality data, the solution for bobs of Kepler-51b remains bi-modal, thus implying the existence of two distinct tran-sit geometries that fit the observations equally well. Our posterior for bobs , obtained from a joint fit of all avail-able epochs, is consistent with both the low-b and high-b

solutions reported and shows no significant tension with individual measurements. This reflects the degeneracy imposed by the temporal resolution of the available pho-tometry instead of a physical disagreement. The total transit duration T14 and the flat-bottom du-ration T23 are not frequently tabulated in the literature, because most works describe the transit shape directly using ( a/R ⋆)obs and bobs rather than the contact-time durations themselves. In the one case where T14 has been published by K. Masuda et al. (2024), our poste-rior values for both planets are consistent, differing by at most ≲ 4 minutes, which lies comfortably within the quoted uncertainties. In contrast, the scaled semi-major axis ( a/R ⋆)obs is the most consistently determined ob-servable across all datasets and analyses: our measure-ments for both planets agree with those of K. Masuda et al. (2024), J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020), and the independent JWST-based determination of J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2025) to within 1 σ. This agreement shows that the orbital scale of the system is effectively unaffected by the cadence, wavelength coverage, or mod-eling assumptions described above, and that ( a/R ⋆)obs 

is set almost entirely by the precisely measured orbital period and total transit duration. 

3. TRANSIT-INFERRED VERSUS INDEPENDENT STELLAR DENSITIES A key consequence of comparing transit-inferred and independently determined stellar densities (K2014) is that, within the standard transit model—assuming un-blended, spot-free light curves and spherical planets on circular orbits—all transiting planets in the same sys-tem must yield an identical value of ρ⋆, obs . This con-clusion follows directly from Kepler’s third law: the in-ferred stellar density is computed from the measured orbital scale ( a/R ⋆)obs that only depends on the transit light-curve morphology and the orbital period (see sec-tion 6 for more details). Consequently, if ρ⋆, obs differs among multiple planets that orbit the same star, this indicates that the standard transit model is failing to capture some aspect of the actual transit geometry for 7at least one of the planets, or that the light curves are being systematically modified by a physical effect not accounted for in the model. Figure 2 presents the marginal posterior distributions of ρ⋆, obs derived from our photometric analysis for both planets (filled histograms and continuous lines), together with the corresponding distribution of ρ⋆, true from the independent isochrone-based estimates of T. A. Berger et al. (2023), J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020) and K. Masuda et al. (2024) (dashed, empty curves). For the latter cases, we represent their posterior distributions as normal distributions, using the reported means and uncertainties. For ease of comparison, the mean values and associated 1-σ or 68% uncertainties from our work and from the literature are compiled in Table 3. To quantify the offset while propagating the uncer-tainty of both quantities, we compute the density stellar ratio (D. M. Kipping et al. 2012), Ψ ≡

 ρ⋆, obs 

ρ⋆, true 



(1) at the sample level, pairing samples from our PhotoFIT posterior distributions with values taken from a normal distribution defined by μρ = 2 .08 and σρ = 0 .08 g cm −3,matching the isochrone-based (MIST+Gaia DR3) esti-mate of K. Masuda et al. (2024), which was obtained under the currently preferred four-planet configuration of the system. We obtain Ψ b = 1 .18 ± 0.06 and Ψ d = 1 .04 ± 0.08 (me-dians and 68% credible intervals), with 95% credible in-tervals of [1 .04 , 1.29] and [0 .90 , 1.20]. Measured against the no-effect value, Ψ = 1, Kepler-51b lies 2 .9σ below the median with P (Ψ b ≤ 1) = 0 .8%, but only 0 .6σ be-low it for Kepler-51d, with P (Ψ d ≤ 1) = 29%. With this narrower stellar prior the error budget is now dominated by the photometry rather than by the stellar characteri-zation, most clearly for Kepler-51d, where ρ⋆, obs carries a ∼ 7% uncertainty against ∼ 4% on ρ⋆, true .The two planets must therefore be treated indepen-dently, and our interpretation of the corresponding val-ues is intentionally conservative. Kepler-51b exhibits an offset that is unlikely to be explained by random noise alone, but it still does not reach any threshold that would justify a formal detection. In contrast, Kepler-51d is fully compatible with the absence of any asterodensity profiling signal: its 68% credible interval, [0 .97 , 1.13], in-cludes unity. Accordingly, we describe these quantities as density offsets rather than as “anomalies” in what fol-lows, and we opt to simply report the values and allow the reader to decide whether an effect is present. Several mechanisms could contribute to any gen-uine difference between the stellar density inferred from photometry and that obtained from other stellar-astrophysics methods: (i) An underlying non-circular orbit, commonly known as the photoeccentric effect (R. I. Daw-son & J. A. Johnson 2012; D. M. Kipping et al. 2012; D. M. Kipping 2014). If a planet transits near periastron, its higher orbital velocity mim-ics a closer orbit, leading to an artificially inflated inferred stellar density. (ii) The omission of an explicit spot correction in the photometric analysis, which affects the measured (a/R ⋆)obs and, in turn, ρ⋆, obs . In our study, this effect could partially explain the higher stellar den-sities derived for both planets, as outlined in sub-section 2.3. (iii) Unmodeled dynamical interactions among the planets. Kepler-51 exhibits large-amplitude tran-sit timing variations (TTVs) that can distort the effective transit light-curve shape if not properly accounted for. In our analysis, we substantially mitigate this bias by fitting a separate mid-transit time for each individual epoch. More generally, an incomplete characterization of the system’s ar-chitecture can also bias stellar-density estimates. This is demonstrated by the three-planet config-uration assumed by K. Masuda (2014), as well as by both the transit-fitting and photodynami-cal analyses of K. Masuda et al. (2024) (Table 3). That truncated dynamical model incorrectly pre-dicted the JWST-measured mid-transit time of Kepler-51d by ∼ 120 minutes. Consequently, stellar-density inferences that rely on this as-sumption—including those presented here, which likewise neglect perturbations from the fourth planet—may also be affected by systematic biases. (iv) The existence of an extra geometric feature—such as a ring system—that changes the observed tran-sit configuration by enlarging the effective occult-ing area and altering the transit contact times.  

> 4.

ASSESSING THE PHOTOECCENTRIC EFFECT As explained in point (i) of section 3, the posi-tive density offset observed in Kepler-51b and d (Ψ ≡

ρ⋆, obs /ρ ⋆, true > 1) could in principle be induced by an unmodeled orbital eccentricity if the planets transit near periastron. This is known as the photoeccentric ef-fect (R. I. Dawson & J. A. Johnson 2012). To verify whether this mechanism can account for the observed 

ρ⋆, obs , we calculate the minimum eccentricity emin re-quired by PhotoFIT and compare it against the dynam-ical constraints imposed by TTVs (K2014). 8

Figure 2. Marginal posterior distributions of the transit-derived stellar density, ρ⋆, obs , for Kepler-51b (blue) and d (orange), obtained from the PhotoFIT presented here (filled histograms and continuous lines). The discontinuous curves correspond to the value of the true stellar density ρ⋆, true ad obtained by independent works using isochrone-based posterior samples (J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. 2020; T. A. Berger et al. 2023; K. Masuda et al. 2024). 

For a single planet, the minimum eccentricity capable of producing Ψ > 1 (which occurs when the argument of periastron ω = 90 ◦) is given by: 

emin = Ψ2/3 − 1Ψ2/3 + 1 . (2) By evaluating this expression over our posterior sam-ples of Ψ for each planet, we find emin = 0 .054 +0 .016  

> −0.018

for Kepler-51b emin = 0 .034 +0 .044  

> −0.022

for Kepler-51d. The in-terval stays relatively wide for Kepler-51d because emin 

depends very sensitively on Ψ when Ψ is near 1, and this planet’s value of the ratio is close to unity. As illus-trated in Figure 3, these photometric requirements are larger than the dynamical eccentricities derived from N-body models (e.g. K. Masuda et al. 2024), which give 

eb = 0 .0162 ± 0.0038 and ed = 0 .0076 ± 0.0058 for the Outside 2:1 solution. The median emin is larger than the dynamical estimate by a factor of ∼ 3.4 for b and ∼ 4.4for d. When the two sources of uncertainty are added in quadrature, the discrepancy corresponds to 2 .1σ for Kepler-51b and 1 .1σ for Kepler-51d: for b, the photo-metric requirement is somewhat at odds with, though not inconsistent with, the dynamical limit, whereas for d the two constraints are mutually compatible. Nevertheless, the eccentricities inferred from the TTV analysis are subject to uncertainties; so, there is a non-negligible probability that some of these eccentricities yield values of Ψ that are consistent with the PhotoFIT 

Figure 3. The minimum required eccentricity emin plotted as a function of the density ratio Ψ = ρ⋆, obs /ρ ⋆, true (solid black curve). The dashed curves show the actual eccentric-ity values obtained from the detailed TTV analysis by K. Masuda et al. (2024). 

posterior distribution. To quantitatively evaluate this probability, we carried out a Monte Carlo calculation of 9

Table 3. Estimates of the stellar density for Kepler-51. The values are grouped according to whether they are obtained from transit observables (including photodynamical modeling) or from independent stellar characterization. The transit-based estimates reported by K. Masuda et al. (2024) were derived under the assumption of the previously known three-planet configu-ration, whereas their isochrone-based stellar characterization was carried out using the current four-planet model. For reference, we also list an estimate of the logarithmic PR scale PR = 10 log 10 (ρ⋆/2 g cm −3), computed by adopting a true reference stellar density of 2 g cm −3, which is close to the mean of the independent estimates. The uncertainties on PR were computed via straightforward linear error propagation. The PR values are reported for context only and are not used in the inference analysis. IsoFIT stands for Isochrone fitting. Category Method ρ⋆ [g cm −3] Ψ PR (ref.) Source Transit-derived PhotoFIT posterior 2.441 +0 .053  

> −0.073

1.18 ± 0.06 0.87 ± 0.12 This work (Kepler-51b) PhotoFIT posterior 2.171 +0 .158  

> −0.147

1.04 ± 0.08 0.36 ± 0.31 This work (Kepler-51d) Transit light-curve fit 2.16 +0 .15  

> −0.13

– 0.33 ± 0.28 K. Masuda (2014) Transit light-curve fit 2.42 ± 0.06 – 0.83 ± 0.11 K. Masuda et al. (2024) N-body Photodynamical fit ∼ 2.56 +0 .423  

> −0.34686

– 1.07 ± 0.65 K. Masuda et al. (2024) Independent IsoFIT (CKS+Gaia DR2) 2.03 ± 0.08 – – J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. (2020) IsoFIT (MIST+Gaia DR3) 2.08 ± 0.08 – – K. Masuda et al. (2024) IsoFIT (Gaia DR3) 1.896 +0 .218  

> −0.246

– – T. A. Berger et al. (2023) 

the expected values of the photoeccentric bias, defined as (K2014): ΨPE ≡ (1 + e sin ω)3

(1 − e2)3/2 . (3) In Figure 4, we present the comparison between the distribution of predicted bias provided the uncertainties in e and e sin ω from K. Masuda (2014) and the measured density ratio for both planets. As is evident from the predicted PE bias distributions for both planets, the overlap with the observed density ratios is partial. To formally quantify this, we compute a 

p-value, defined as 6 the fraction of dynamically allowed configurations that produce a synthetic density ratio ΨPE equal to or greater than the observed ratio Ψ. By marginalizing over the dynamical constraints on eccen-tricity and assuming a uniform distribution for the argu-ment of periastron ω, we obtain p ≈ 0.007 for Kepler-51b and p ≈ 0.33 for Kepler-51d. Furthermore, even under the most conservative and optimistic assumption of per-fect orbital alignment ( ω = π/ 2, yielding the maximum possible PE bias for a given eccentricity), these values rise to p ≈ 0.033 and p ≈ 0.42, respectively. For Kepler-51b this disfavours unmodelled eccentricity as the sole driver of the offset, though we would not describe a p-value of this size as excluding it. For Kepler-51d a p-value of 0 .33 carries no evidential weight at all, and the   

> 6We intentionally refer to this quantity as a p-value. It is a tail probability calculated under the PE hypothesis; it is not the probability that the PE hypothesis is false, and it should not be interpreted that way.

photoeccentric effect remains an entirely adequate ac-count of that planet’s much smaller offset. A final concern remains before we can fully trust the previous result. The analysis relies on the assump-tion that the true density is known precisely. To test for any bias arising from the adopted reference density 

ρ⋆, true , we employ the Multibody Asterodensity Pro-filing (MAP) framework (D. M. Kipping et al. 2012). MAP exploits the requirement that both planets or-bit the same host star. The ratio of their transit-derived densities yields the observable quantity Θ bd ≡

(Ψ b/Ψd)2/3. Using a first-order expansion of the pho-toeccentric effect, D. M. Kipping et al. (2012) shows that a deviation of Θ bd from unity imposes an absolute lower limit on the combined eccentricity of the pair: (eb + ed) ≥ |Θbd − 1|

2 ≡ (eb + ed)min . (4) Our analysis yields an observed ratio Ψb/Ψd =1.125 +0 .090 

> −0.082

, and hence Θ bd = 1 .081 +0 .057 

> −0.053

, which sits 1.5σ from unity with P (Θ bd ≤ 1) = 5%. The corre-sponding MAP-inferred lower bound is ( eb + ed)min ≈

0.041 +0 .029 

> −0.025

. However, the sum of the dynamical eccen-tricities from K. Masuda et al. (2024) is only ( eb + ed) ≈

0.024. This dynamical sum falls below the median MAP estimate but remains inside its 68% credible interval, and 27% of our posterior samples for ( eb + ed)min are consistent with it. The MAP test therefore does not 

on its own rule out the photoeccentric effect; it yields a verdict of similarly modest significance as the single-planet analysis above. Its utility here is that it does so without relying on ρ⋆, true : Θ bd is constructed solely 10        

> Figure 4. Top panels: Forward prediction of the pho-toeccentric bias Ψ PE (e, ω ) versus the observed density ra-tio Ψ, using dynamical posteriors from K. Masuda et al. (2024). Bottom panel: The Multibody Asterodensity Pro-filing (MAP) analysis which compares the expected inter– planet density ratio Θ bd = (Ψ b/Ψd)2/3to the observed one.

from the two transit-inferred densities, so this test is unaffected by the adopted stellar characterization and produces identical results whether one uses K. Masuda et al. (2024) or T. A. Berger et al. (2023). In light of the strong dependence of the single-planet findings on that choice, we consider the MAP-based metric to be the more robust of the two.  

> 5.

GEOMETRIC MODELING OF RINGED PLANET TRANSITS With the photometric offsets in hand, we now intro-duce the geometric forward model that maps a candi-date ring configuration onto the transit observables used above. Our inference scheme relies on a deterministic, geometry-based forward model that connects a speci-fied ring configuration to the associated effective transit observables. While we follow that relationship via the open-source Python package exorings 7 (ZKSA2015), this work represents an improved and expanded version of such analytical model on planetary ring transits. The orbital period P , the impact parameter b, and the true stellar density ρ⋆, true are three key input pa-rameters in the particular forward-model implementa-tion adopted in this work. From these quantities, the geometric scaled semi-major axis is obtained via Ke-pler’s third law (S. Seager & G. Mall´ en-Ornelas 2003, hereafter SMO2003): 

 aR⋆



> geo

=

 G ρ ⋆, true 

3π P 2

1/3

(5) where G is the gravitational constant. For a circular orbit ( e = 0), the orbital inclination is then given by cos iorb = b

(a/R ⋆)geo 

(6) Two remarks are worth highlighting. First, by using the stellar density ρ⋆, true as an input parameter instead of the stellar mass M⋆ and radius R⋆, we avoid need-ing prior knowledge of those basic stellar properties for the analysis itself. Second, although we explicitly in-clude R⋆ when referring to the scaled semi-major axis, all spatial scales are actually expressed in units of the stellar radius. As a result, the absolute value of R⋆ is not strictly required for the analysis. Still, to interpret the final inferred properties or express them in SI units, we must adopt values for both stellar parameters (or at least for one of them, given that the stellar density is taken to be known). The ring system is modeled as a geometrically thin annulus extending from an inner radius Rin = fip to an outer radius Rout = fep, where p ≡ Rp/R ⋆ corresponds to the scaled planetary radius and fi, f e are dimension-less radii in units of p. 

> 7The original version is available at https://github.com/facom/ exorings, and an updated release is maintained in this work’s repository at https://github.com/seap-udea/aPRe.

11 The orientation of the ring relative to the observer is described by two angles defined with respect to the plane of the sky. These angles determine the geome-try of the ring’s sky-projected shape, which is modeled as a perfect ellipse with semimajor axis A = fep and semiminor axis B = A cos iR. The orientation angles are iR, the projected ring inclination (i.e., the dihedral angle between the ring plane and the sky plane, where 

iR = 90 ◦ represents an edge-on view of the ring), and 

θR, the projected tilt angle (the angle between the pro-jected major axis of the ring and the orbital direction, where θR = 90 ◦ indicates that the projected major axis is perpendicular to the transit chord). Planetary rings are not fully opaque. To describe their opacity, we adopt a wavelength-independent normal at-tenuation α8. This parameter is then used to derive a blocking factor β = 1 − α1/ cos iR (J. W. Barnes & J. J. Fortney 2004), which incorporates both blocking and absorption effects and scales the ring’s contribution to the total occulting area according to its inclination. Given these inputs, our forward model computes two classes of observables. First, it evaluates the effective occulting area Aeff and the corresponding transit depth: 

δgeo = Aeff 

πR 2

> ⋆

. (7) In practice, Aeff is written as the area of the planetary disk plus the effective projected area of the annulus. The latter is computed using closed-form expressions for the effective projected areas of the outer and inner ring edges as functions of ( fi, f e, i R, α ), including the edge-on limit where only a fraction of the annulus projects outside the planetary disk (Eq. 2 in ZKSA2015). Second, it determines the locations of the contact points along the transit chord. To illustrate the transit geometry with the exact definitions of the contact positions and transit durations, please refer to Figure 10. The planet-only contacts xp, 1... 4 are obtained from the intersection of the planetary disk with the stellar limb at impact parameter b. For the ring contacts xR, 1... 4,rather than adopting the approximate analytical inter-section from ZKSA2015 that breaks down at certain high inclinations, we employ a robust, exact-like analyt-ical solution based on the Support Function of a convex            

> 8The normal attenuation αis related to the normal optical depth
> τvia α= exp( −τ). We prefer the parameterization in terms of
> αbecause it is strictly bounded between 0 and 1. This improves numerical stability during Bayesian inference and mitigates the pathological behavior of τin the high-opacity regime ( τ≫
> 1), where very large variations in optical depth produce only negligible changes in the forward model.

body (see Appendix A). The four ring-contact positions along the transit chord are given by: 

xR, 1 ≈ − p(1 + hL)2 − b2

xR, 2 ≈ − pmax(0 , [1 − hL]2 − b2) (8) 

xR, 3 ≈ +pmax(0 , [1 − hR]2 − b2)

xR, 4 ≈ +p(1 + hR)2 − b2,

where hL and hR are the effective directional radii of the projected ring ellipse at ingress and egress, respectively: 

h2 

> L

= A2(−x0 cos θR + b sin θR)2

+ B2(b cos θR + x0 sin θR)2 (9) 

h2 

> R

= A2(x0 cos θR + b sin θR)2

+ B2(b cos θR − x0 sin θR)2

(see equations A6 and A5 in the Appendix). These formulae are key to the methodological implementation used here: as they are fully analytical, we can perform computationally intensive numerical procedures without incurring prohibitively long computation times. The final contact positions are then taken as xi =min[ xp,i , x R,i ], and converted into the ringed transit du-rations via 

T geo 14 = P

2π arcsin 

 x4 − x1

(a/R ⋆)geo sin iorb 



(10) 

T geo 23 = P

2π arcsin 

 x3 − x2

(a/R ⋆)geo sin iorb 



. (11) This mathematical procedure specifies the for-ward mapping from the ringed-planet parameters (p, f i, f e, i R, θ R, α ) to the predicted effective transit ob-servables ( δgeo , T geo 14 , T geo 23 ), under the assumption that the stellar and orbital input parameters P , b, and ρ⋆, true 

are independently provided. 

6. ASTERODENSITY PROFILING The geometric model described in section 5 provides the relationship between the ring parameters and the transit observables. We now introduce the asterodensity profiling framework, which converts these observables into a stellar density, along with the PhotoRing effect that we invert in the remainder of this work. Assuming a spherical, opaque planet with a mass 

Mp ≪ M⋆, in a circular orbit and transiting a spherical, unblended star of radius R⋆ with negligible limb darken-ing at the maximum transit depth position, SMO2003 showed a mean stellar density, ρ⋆, obs , can be inferred from the transit observables by inverting Equation 5: 12 

ρ⋆, obs = 3πGP 2

 aR⋆

3obs 

. (12) The observed scaled semi-major axis ( a/R ⋆)obs should not be mistaken for ( a/R ⋆)geo that is computed in the forward model from the orbital period and the true stel-lar density (Equation 5). SMO2003 demonstrated that (a/R ⋆)obs can be expressed in terms of the total T14 and full-transit duration T23 , via their Equation 8 9:

 aR⋆

2obs 

= F 2(+) − b2obs 

1 − sin 2 (πT 14 /P )

sin 2 (πT 14 /P ) , (13) where F(±) ≡ (1 ± √δ) is an auxiliary variable. This formula assumes non-grazing transits (1 < b < 

1 − p), a planet that is much smaller than its host star (p ≪ 1), and transit durations that are much shorter than the orbital period ( T14 /P ≪ 1). These conditions are typically met in most transiting exoplanet systems (SMO2003; K2014), including the Kepler-51 planets. Under the same assumptions, the observed impact pa-rameter bobs is obtained from the transit shape via Equa-tion 9 in SMO2003: 

b2obs = F 2(−) − sin 2 (πT 23 /P ) / sin 2 (πT 14 /P ) F 2(+) 

1 − sin 2 (πT 23 /P ) / sin 2 (πT 14 /P ) .

(14) It is worth noting that equations (13) and (14), and thus Equation 12, are equally valid when using the geo-metrically computed durations T geo 14 and T geo 23 from the forward model, obtained via Equation 10 and Equa-tion 11. The specific context in which the formulae are employed determines which set of quantities should be used. For example, when deriving the observed semi-major axis in the photometric analysis (see subsec-tion 2.2), the time and period values are those inferred from the photometric data, namely δ, T14 , and T23 . In contrast, during the inference stage we employ instead the geometric quantities δgeo , T geo 14 , and T geo 23 (see sec-tion 7). 6.1. The PhotoRing Effect 

Planetary rings introduce geometric effects that are not captured by the standard spherical-planet transit model. As shown by ZKSA2015, the projected area of a ring system can substantially increase the observed               

> 9We distinguish here between the measured transit parameters
> T14 and T23 and the calculated values Tgeo 14 and Tgeo 23 produced by the forward model

transit depth δobs . When rings are not included in the transit model, this larger depth δobs is interpreted as being produced by a larger planetary disk, which leads to an overestimation of the planetary radius Rp.Rings also modify the contact times of a transit. Be-cause the ring system extends beyond the planetary limb, the first contact occurs earlier and the fourth con-tact occurs later than in the case of a ringless planet. As a result, the total transit duration T14 increases, while the full-transit duration T23 becomes shorter. Since these three quantities constitute the fundamental tran-sit observables, these geometric distortions propagate through the transit fitting procedure and bias the in-ferred values of ( a/R ⋆)obs and bobs (i.e., equations 13 and 14, respectively). Consequently, the stellar density derived from the transit, ρ⋆, obs , can be significantly un-der or overestimated. The resulting systematic offset in the stellar density inferred from transits due to an unaccounted-for ring system was first characterized by ZKSA2015 and is known as the PhotoRing (PR) effect. The magnitude of this effect is expressed using a loga-rithmic scale that employs the same notation: PR ≡ 10 log 10 Ψ. (15) In Figure 5, we present contours of the PR-effect met-ric across a wide range of ring orientations. We adopt planetary and stellar parameters akin to those of Kepler-51b, along with tentative properties for the ring system. As shown, PR effect typically causes the stellar density to be underestimated; that is, ρ⋆, obs < ρ ⋆, true or PR < 0, with only a relatively small domain where ρ⋆, obs >ρ⋆, true . Interestingly, for systems hosting ringed plan-ets—with similar properties to those assumed here—the inferred stellar mean density can be underestimated by as much as a factor of ≈ 2.5 (PR ≈ − 4) or overestimated by up to a factor of ≈ 1.6 (PR ≈ +2). 6.2. The PhotoRing Hypothesis 

For Kepler-51, offsets in the stellar density could al-legedly result from scenarios (ii) or (iii) of section 3, but having found scenario (i) to be disfavoured for Kepler-51b and essentially unconstrained for Kepler-51d in sec-tion 4, we now turn our attention to scenario (iv). In the remainder of this work we focus on this ringed-planet scenario—not because we consider it the most likely cause of the observed density discrepancies, but to evaluate whether a ringed configuration can bring the transit observables into agreement with a self-consistent stellar density, and to establish which ring configurations the data can already exclude. We also emphasize that this is the first study in the literature to perform a full inference using the PR effect. Therefore, even if other 13      

> Figure 5. Heat map and contour lines of the PhotoRing (PR) logarithmic scale as a function of the effective ring orientation parameters ( iR, θ R). PR is evaluated for an analogue of Kepler-51b with a bulk density equal to that of Earth. The thick black contour marks the zero level, P R = 0, which identifies configurations that exhibit a density degeneracy (i.e., the inferred stellar density is equal to the true density despite the presence of rings). The highlighted contour correspond to the nominal observed offset for the actual planet Kepler-51b according to our PhotoFIT fits (see text for details).

explanations for the density offsets are also plausible—or indeed if no effect is present at all—, this scenario offers a general methodology and establishes computational tools that can be applied to the light-curve analysis of rings in other planetary systems. Before proceeding, it is helpful to state the converse result, which is on more secure footing than any affir-mative claim we can make here. Specifically, because 

the inferred density offsets are small, any ring system around these planets must generate an equally small PR signature. The strongly negative-PR region of Fig-ure 5—corresponding to extended, optically thick rings viewed at low projected tilt, and encompassing most of the allowed ring parameter space—predicts ρ⋆, obs values far below ρ⋆, true and is ruled out by our posteriors at 99% credibility for Kepler-51b and 70% for Kepler-51d. Con-sequently, a wide range of possible ring configurations is excluded using archival Kepler photometry alone, with-out the need for dedicated follow-up observations. If the density offsets are caused by the presence of rings, a notable feature of the specific case under con-sideration is that the sign of the measured offset in all our analyses falls in the positive-PR regime (i.e., 

ρ⋆, obs > ρ ⋆, true ), which is less frequently encountered than the negative-PR regime (see Figure 5). This does not rule out the ring hypothesis—since physically plau-sible configurations include both zero and positive off-sets—but it indicates that for rings to drive the observed offset they must fall into a relatively constrained region of the parameter space. In particular, this would require the rings to have relatively large tilt angles, θR ≳ 60 ◦,with respect to the orbital plane. Such large tilts may occur when the ring inclination relative to the orbital plane is also substantial. The consequences of these con-figurations will be examined in section 9.  

> 7.

BAYESIAN INFERENCE: FROM OBSERVABLES TO RING PARAMETERS The forward model introduced in section 5 specifies a deterministic relationship between the ring configura-tion parameters θ = ( p, f i, f e, i R, θ R, τ )—given a set of 14 nuisance parameters η = ( P, ρ ⋆, true , b )—and the result-ing effective transit observables: 

θ 7 → y(θ, η) ≡ (ρ⋆, obs , δ geo , T geo 14 , T geo 23 , b obs ). (16) Our aim is to identify which ring configurations are compatible with the constraints set by the observed transits, while rigorously accounting for both observa-tional and stellar uncertainties in the Kepler-51 sys-tem. To this end, we must specify the probability dis-tribution function (PDF) of the predicted parameters (ρ⋆, obs , δ geo , T geo 14 , T geo 23 , b obs ), conditioned on the avail-able photometric data. 7.1. Likelihood 

The most natural choice for the PDF of the transit ob-servables is the joint posterior distribution of the photo-metric observables ( ρ⋆, obs , δ, T 14 , T 23 ). You may observe that bobs no longer appears in this list, as it also serves as a nuisance parameter. Because the photometric analy-sis does not yield a continuous distribution, we construct a non-parametric approximation to this function using a multivariate Gaussian kernel density estimator (KDE; D. W. Scott 1992). To do so, we select a statistically rep-resentative subsample of the PhotoFIT-derived samples of the observable vector. We denote this subsample by 

{yph  

> m

}Nm=1 , where ym corresponds to the mth joint real-ization of the chosen observables. These samples there-fore provide a discrete characterization of the joint pos-terior distribution of y implied by the PhotoFIT, which we approximate with the following Gaussian KDE: 

bp(y) = 1

N

> N

X

> m=1

N  y yph  

> m

, H , (17) where H = h2Σ is the KDE bandwidth matrix, con-structed from the sample covariance matrix Σ and a bandwidth scaling factor h, which determines the de-gree of smoothing and the correlations of the kernel in the transit observable space. We adopt the standard au-tomated bandwidth selection implemented in the KDE routine, following Scott’s or Silverman’s rule (D. W. Scott 1992; B. W. Silverman 1986). The resulting continuous function yields an estimate of the probability density across the region of transit ob-servables preferred by the photometric analysis. For any candidate ring configuration θk, the forward model gen-erates an associated observable vector, y(θk, η) (for the treatment of the nuisance parameters see subsection 7.2 below). We then assess the agreement between this pre-diction and the photometric posterior by evaluating the KDE density at that point and adopting this value as the likelihood. In this way, correlated uncertainties among the observables are naturally accounted for, without de-pending on independent point estimates or imposing a specific parametric form for the likelihood: 

L(θk) ∝ bp(y = y(θk, η) . (18) The retrieval process consists of sampling the poste-rior distribution of ring parameters, θ, exploring the re-gion of ring-parameter space whose predicted observ-ables are most consistent with the distribution inferred from the photometric analysis. 7.2. Treatment of Nuisance Parameters 

The orbital period P , impact parameter b, and true stellar density ρ⋆, true determine the transit chord geome-try and orbital scale via the inferred values of ( a/R ⋆)geo 

and iorb (Equation 5 and Equation 6). They conse-quently influence how a given ring configuration trans-lates into the effective transit observables. Because these parameters are not intrinsic to the ring geometry and are instead affected by measurement uncertainties, we treat them as nuisance parameters. Across our retrieval suite, we adopt several different handling strategies for them, ensuring that their uncertainties are propagated into the derived ring properties. In all setups, P is fixed and set to the literature value, following the values reported by K. Masuda et al. (2024). Depending on the specific run configuration ,

b and/or ρ⋆, true are either kept at fiducial values, ex-plicitly sampled, or effectively marginalized over within the likelihood. When these parameters are sampled, we use a truncated normal prior for the impact parameter, 

b ∼ TruncNorm( μb, σ b; [0 , 1]), centered, again, on the ringless-fit value reported by K. Masuda et al. (2024), and a one-dimensional KDE prior for ρ⋆, true based on the isochrone-informed stellar-density posterior from T. A. Berger et al. (2023). In the most basic setup, when b and/or ρ⋆, true are not sampled, we fix them at their mean values. As a robustness check, we additionally use a pseudo-marginal likelihood in which these parameters are integrated into the likelihood via Monte Carlo averaging, 

L(θk) ≈ 1

M

> M

X

> j=1

bp



y = y(θk, η(j))



, (19) where θ represents the remaining ring parameters and the random realizations η(j) = ( P, ρ (j)

> ⋆, true

, b (j)) are sam-pled from their prior distributions. This method in-corporates the external uncertainties in b and ρ⋆, true 

while retaining the original prior information, without embedding these parameters directly into the sampling 15 chain. This corresponds to the proper Bayesian treat-ment when such parameters are external constraints that should not be updated by the transit data. 7.3. Parameter Space and Priors 

In all cases, the retrieval scheme surveys the parame-ter space ( fe, i R, θ R, p, τ ), keeping the inner ring radius fixed at fi = 1 since the current photometric precision is insufficient to resolve structures lying inside the ring’s outer edge. The planetary radius ratio p is either fixed or allowed to vary freely, allowing the possibility that a portion of the measured transit depth is contributed by the rings themselves. This would imply a smaller plane-tary radius and could partially account for the unusually low bulk densities inferred for these super-puff planets when no rings are assumed. In the fixed-radius runs, we set p = pmin , corresponding to the limiting–density configuration for the planet (see below). For the planetary and ring parameters, we adopt pri-ors within physically justified intervals. For the ring’s outer radius, we adopt a uniform prior fe ∼ U (1 , f e, max ). The upper bound fe, max = 10 follows the stability limit for prograde rings, which can reach roughly ∼ 0.5 times the planetary Hill radius (R. C. Domingos et al. 2006). For the ring inclination, we assume an isotropic prior, 

p(iR) ∝ sin iR for iR ∈ [0 ◦, 90 ◦], and we adopt a uni-form prior for the projected tilt, θR ∼ U (0 ◦, 90 ◦), thus spanning all possible ring orientations. For the planetary radius, we assume a uniform prior on p limited by physically motivated bounds, pmin ≤

p ≤ pobs . Here, pobs is the transit-derived radius under a ringless model (as reported by K. Masuda et al. 2024), and pmin is a lower bound set by requiring that the bulk density does not exceed that of a rocky, Earth-like com-position, such that pmin = ( R⊕/R ⋆) ( Mp/M ⊕)1/3. We adopt the so-called Outside 2:1 solution of K. Masuda et al. (2024) (their Table 6), taking Mp = 6 .9 M⊕ for both Kepler-51b and Kepler-51d (the reported mass ra-tios m). With R⋆ = 0 .869 R⊙ (T. A. Berger et al. 2023), this yields pmin = 0 .0201 for both planets ( ∼ 1.90 R⊕). When we allow normal attenuation ( α) to vary freely, we impose a uniform prior α ∼ U (0 , 1). For exploratory analyses, we instead fix α = 0 .368, which represents a ring system with moderate opacity and is similar to the optical depths observed in portions of Saturn’s main rings (G. Xystouris et al. 2023). This choice prevents the introduction of an extra parameter partially degen-erate with ring size and orientation, thereby lowering the dimensionality and computational expense of the retrieval while still providing a representative reference ring model. For completeness and to facilitate repro-

Table 4. Prior distributions used in the ring retrieval. The planetary mass and stellar radius employed to calculate pmin 

are taken from K. Masuda et al. (2024) and T. A. Berger et al. (2023), respectively.                                        

> Parameter Prior Range
> Ring geometry
> feU(1 , f e, max )[1 ,10] Rp
> fiFixed fi= 1
> iRp(iR)∝sin iR[0 ◦,90 ◦]
> θRU(0 ◦,90 ◦)[0 ◦,90 ◦]
> α†U(0 ,1) [0 ,1]
> Planetary radius †
> pU(pmin , p obs )[0 .0201 ,0.0722] (b) [0 .0201 ,0.0986] (d)
> Nuisance parameters †a
> ρ⋆, true T. A. Berger et al. (2023) 1.896 +0 .218
> −0.246
> bK. Masuda et al. (2024) 0.074 ±0.072 (b) 0.003 ±0.095 (d)
> Fixed orbital parameters
> PFixed (K. Masuda et al. 2024) 45 .154 b 130 .186 d
> aParameters indicated with a †are kept fixed in the baseline con-figurations and are only varied in the fully unconstrained model.

ducibility, Table 4 reports the priors adopted in our in-ference procedure. 7.4. Posterior sampling 

We investigate the posterior distribution of the ring parameters using complementary Bayesian sampling techniques. Our main inference framework relies on nested sampling implemented via the dynesty Python package (J. S. Speagle 2020), which yields both pos-terior samples and estimates of the Bayesian evidence (Z). The Bayesian evidence, mathematically defined as the integral of the likelihood function over the entire prior volume ( Z = R L(θ)π(θ)d θ), provides a natural metric for model comparison that intrinsically penalizes unnecessarily complex models, often referred to as the Bayesian Occam’s razor. This method is particularly well suited to handling the complex likelihood structure resulting from the KDE-based observational constraints. We use a run configuration of Nlive = 1200 live points, ∆ ln Z = 0 .01 as stop condition, and NKDE = 5000 pho-tometric posterior samples to train the likelihood. To validate the robustness of the inferred posterior struc-ture, we additionally analyze selected configurations us-ing the affine-invariant ensemble MCMC sampler emcee 16 (D. Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013). The agreement be-tween both methods provides an independent consis-tency attention on ring parameter constraints and ex-ploration mode. 

8. INFERRED RING GEOMETRIES The problem in hand is highly dimensional: 6 di-mensions correspond to the ringed planet parame-ters (p, f i, f e, i R, θ R, τ ), plus 3 nuisance parameters (P, ρ ⋆, true , b ), while the likelihood-KDE is defined in an additional 4-dimensional space ( ρ⋆, obs , δ, T 14 , T 23 ). With so many degrees of freedom and the added complex-ity of the numerical KDE, the fitting procedure may be subject to significant numerical and mathematical lim-itations. Our goal is to reduce this complexity while avoiding the loss of essential features of the data and the information contained therein. The minimal dimensionality reduction occurs when, as described in subsection 7.2, we treat the nuisance pa-rameter P (the orbital period) as constant and fix it to the literature value, leaving only two remaining nui-sance parameters. In addition, in all configurations we impose fi = 1, because the current photometric preci-sion is too low to resolve any substructure within the outer boundary of the ring. This choice further reduces the dimensionality of the parameter space to 5. Under these assumptions, the model takes as input parameters 

θ = ( fe, i R, θ R, p, τ ), treats η = ( ρ⋆, true , b ) as nuisance parameters, and considers y = ( ρ⋆, obs , δ, T 14 , T 23 ) as ob-servables or KDE variables. We refer to this specific choice of input+nuisance+observable parameters as the 

full-set retrieval configuration .In Figure 6 and Figure 7, we present the outcomes of fitting the data for both planets using this full-set con-figuration. At first glance, two notable features emerge from the schematic representation of the planet in the corner plot and the median values reported in the figure title (see also Table 5). First, the planetary depiction is consistent with our expectation that, since PR > 0 for both planets, the favored ring configurations correspond to highly inclined rings located in the upper part of Fig-ure 5. Second, we find that the resulting solutions yield planetary radii comparable to those inferred from the ring-free analysis: this indicates that the ringed model likewise requires inflated planets, now encircled by rings. We call these solutions “puff ringed planets”. In the same figures, it is worth noting the tension be-tween the values of the true density when it is treated as a nuisance parameter (see filled area in the marginal plot, second row from bottom to top) and the indepen-dent estimate of this same quantity (dashed curve). An analogous tension appears for the nuisance parameter 

Table 5. Full-set retrieval results for Kepler-51b and Ke-pler-51d. The table reports the median values and the 16th and 84th percentiles for the ring geometry parameters, nuisance parameters, and selected derived physical proper-ties. We assume a stellar radius of 0 .869 R⊙ (T. A. Berger et al. 2023) and a planetary mass of 6 .9 M⊕ for both planets (K. Masuda et al. 2024). For comparison, under a ringless model, the inferred planetary radii are 6 .85 R⊕ (Kepler-51b) and 9 .36 R⊕ (Kepler-51d), yielding anomalous densities of 0.11 g cm −3 and 0 .038 g cm −3, respectively.                           

> Parameter Kepler-51b Kepler-51d
> Ring geometry
> fe[Rp]1.53 +3 .11
> −0.40 1.84 +5 .25
> −0.56
> iR[◦]69 .8+13 .1
> −11 .063 .7+15 .0
> −21 .8
> θR[◦]73 .8+12 .7
> −20 .271 .1+11 .8
> −20 .2
> p0.0664 +0 .0036
> −0.0408 0.0721 +0 .0210
> −0.0392
> α0.236 +0 .361
> −0.165 0.473 +0 .325
> −0.312
> Nuisance parameters
> ρ⋆, true [g cm −3]2.31 +0 .14
> −0.35 2.16 +0 .20
> −0.18
> b0.229 +0 .157
> −0.111 0.271 +0 .084
> −0.147
> Derived parameters
> Rp[R⊕]6.30 6.84
> ρp[g cm −3]0.152 0.119

b. Since these two parameters set the orbital scale and the transit chord, respectively, their combined freedom enables the forward model to trade off the ring-contact geometry against the transit durations, without artifi-cially forcing the ring parameters to absorb a geometric discrepancy they cannot physically account for. Nev-ertheless, the sampling procedure fails to obtain solu-tions fully consistent with the observed data when the assumed true stellar densities are too low. Notably, this tension could, in principle, be exploited to constrain the true stellar density using this method. 8.1. Predictive Posterior Checks 

Finding a solution to the retrieval problem is not, by itself, sufficient to ensure that the inferred model ac-tually explains the observed transit features—most im-portantly if we want to ultimately account for the mea-sured stellar density. To assess whether the nested sam-ples produced by our retrievals can recover the marginal posterior distributions of the key observables from the photometric analysis, we conduct goodness-of-fit evalu-ations using posterior predictive checks (PPCs). Specifically, for each retrieval configuration we prop-agate the corresponding posterior samples through the forward model presented in section 5. We then com-17 

Figure 6. Posterior joint distribution for the PR inference of Kepler-51b for a full-set retrieval setup. The corner-plot panels display 2D and 1D marginal posteriors for both the ringed planet parameters and the nuisance parameters. Together with the marginal posterior distribution of the nuisance parameters, we also show the observed PDF for both parameters (dashed lines). For visualization, we include a schematic of the ring system constructed from the median values of the marginal posteriors, indicated by red lines on the 1D panels. The dark disk denotes the planet, while the filled elliptical annulus represents the ring. Red dots on the panels indicate the ringed planet parameters used for the schematic illustration. 18 pare the resulting marginal posterior distributions of the transit observables with those derived directly from the photometric data (section 2). For additional validation, we also consider observables that were not explicitly in-cluded in the likelihood function. The agreement for each observable is quantified using two statistics (see, e.g., A. Ramdas et al. 2017): (i) the 1-Wasserstein dis-tance W1, which measures the mean absolute displace-ment between the two empirical distributions; and (ii) the energy distance E, which measures the squared dis-crepancy between the two distributions. In Figure 8, we compare the marginal posterior dis-tributions (displayed as histograms) of the observables (ρ⋆, obs , δ, T 14 , T 23 ) derived from the photometric analysis with those obtained from the full-set retrieval configura-tion, whose selected outcomes are shown in Figure 6 and Figure 7. For both planets, the ring model reproduces the observed distributions of all four observables, a con-clusion further supported by the corresponding W1 and 

E goodness-of-fit metrics. We emphasize that this con-cerns the adaptability of the ringed model rather than the evidence for the presence of rings: a model with-out rings, but with suitably tuned stellar density, can reproduce the same observables equally well. 8.2. Grid search 

After inspecting the solution obtained from the full-set retrieval, several characteristics of the parameter space in which the problem is defined become apparent. First, for both planets we identify regions of parameter space where one or two values of the planetary radius stand out with higher probabilities than the rest (see third row of Figure 6 and Figure 7, top to bottom). For Kepler-51b, we find a radius close to the minimum allowed value (first peak in the marginal distribution of the third row of Figure 6). When compared with the marginal posterior in the p–fe plane (first column, third row), this corresponds to a large ring with fe ≈ 4 (sec-ond peak in the upper marginal distribution of fe, first column) and a relatively modest opacity (maximum in the α–p panel also in the fourth row). The second solu-tion corresponds to a planet whose radius is nearly iden-tical to that obtained from the ringless model (second peak in the marginal distribution of the third row). As anticipated, in this configuration the ring radius can be very small (first peak in the upper marginal distribution of fe, first column), and the opacity is essentially uncon-strained (islands in the α–p marginal of the fourth row). An analogous analysis can be performed for Kepler-51d, based on an examination of the panels in Figure 7 and the insights obtained from the marginal distributions. This may indicate that our search should better focus on limited regions of the parameter space where promis-ing solutions tend to cluster, rather than taking the me-dian values of the posterior distributions as the best fit. To investigate these specific regions, we performed a grid search. For this exploration, we performed retrievals where the planetary radius p and α were fixed on a grid composed of 5 values of p, evenly distributed between the minimum value pmin and the observed value pobs 

(excluding both endpoints), and three values of α (0.2, 0.5, 0.8). The selection of the grid resolution and its specific values was rather arbitrary, and a more exhaus-tive investigation could be undertaken. Our primary aim was to probe these regions to identify potential lo-cal likelihood maxima. In Table 6 we present the best retrieval results in the grid search for both planets. The retrievals shown are those that fulfill a set of conditions evaluating the quality of the fit, including excellent posterior predic-tive checks (with normalized deviations z1 ≲ 2 and 

zcrit ≲ 2 in the transit observables), a tight agree-ment with the independently derived true stellar den-sity (∆ ρ⋆, true ≲ 0.3 g cm −3), strongly peaked posteriors for the ring inclination, and a lower limit on the ring outer radius indicating a physically distinct structure (fe > 1.1 at the 16th percentile). We refer to this set of optimal solutions as the “Golden Sample”. As shown in Table 6, several of the local configura-tions with fixed p and α yield a higher Bayesian ev-idence (ln Z) than the corresponding full-set retrieval where these parameters vary freely. This behavior di-rectly arises from the Occam’s razor effect inherent to the Bayesian evidence that integrates the likelihood over the entire prior volume. In the highly-degenerate full-set retrieval, the sampler must explore a much larger prior space, including regions of low likelihood and penaliz-ing the total evidence. By fixing p and α near a local likelihood peak, the prior volume is drastically reduced in those dimensions, thus avoiding the volume penalty. Additionally, breaking the degeneracies between the ring geometry and the planetary radius improves the numeri-cal efficiency of the Nested Sampling algorithm, allowing it to better resolve the local probability maxima.  

> 9.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS The framework developed in this study was intended to evaluate whether ring configurations can be found that remain compatible with the existing Kepler-51 transit observations—taking into account the ∼ 30 min instrumental cadence—and, in particular, with the ob-served density offsets. 19 

Table 6. Golden Sample retrievals from the radius-alpha grid search for Kepler-51b and Kepler-51d. 

Input selection Other Metrics Joint pdf Planet p [R⋆] ( R⊕) fe [Rp] iR [◦] θR [◦] α ρ⋆, true [g cm −3] b ρp [g cm −3] ln Z Plot link Kepler-51b  0.0462 (4.38) 3.52 +1 .23  

> −0.98

80 .6+4 .8 

> −11 .5

80 .0+5 .7 

> −9.8

0.20 2.15 +0 .07  

> −0.09

0.31 +0 .04  

> −0.04

0.452 8.17 pdf |ppc 0.0566 (5.37) 1.72 +0 .95  

> −0.26

59 .4+22 .4 

> −18 .7

76 .0+7 .7 

> −9.7

0.20 2.16 +0 .08  

> −0.09

0.31 +0 .04  

> −0.04

0.245 8.13 pdf |ppc 0.0566 (5.37) 1.98 +0 .55  

> −0.23

67 .4+13 .0 

> −12 .8

78 .4+6 .8 

> −6.0

0.50 2.13 +0 .08  

> −0.08

0.32 +0 .04  

> −0.04

0.245 8.07 pdf |ppc 0.0357 (3.39) 3.57 +0 .95  

> −0.45

70 .1+8 .8 

> −10 .0

75 .8+8 .1 

> −6.0

0.50 2.14 +0 .07  

> −0.06

0.32 +0 .03  

> −0.03

0.976 7.66 pdf |ppc 0.0462 (4.38) 3.17 +0 .67  

> −0.71

77 .5+4 .9 

> −13 .9

78 .4+6 .6 

> −7.0

0.50 2.14 +0 .07  

> −0.06

0.32 +0 .03  

> −0.04

0.452 7.25 pdf |ppc 0.0566 (5.37) 2.56 +0 .25  

> −0.16

74 .3+6 .3 

> −6.8

83 .5+4 .0 

> −4.5

0.80 2.15 +0 .07  

> −0.07

0.31 +0 .03  

> −0.04

0.245 7.24 pdf |ppc Kepler-51d  0.0907 (8.61) 1.35 +0 .32  

> −0.11

67 .5+15 .6 

> −20 .0

68 .8+14 .5 

> −14 .5

0.50 2.12 +0 .08  

> −0.07

0.29 +0 .04  

> −0.05

0.060 7.35 pdf |ppc 0.0279 (2.65) 4.29 +1 .05  

> −0.27

45 .8+19 .8 

> −12 .1

69 .5+11 .8 

> −12 .6

0.20 2.11 +0 .10  

> −0.09

0.30 +0 .05  

> −0.05

2.046 6.14 pdf |ppc 0.0279 (2.65) 5.62 +1 .65  

> −0.36

62 .0+14 .7 

> −8.3

71 .2+12 .9 

> −5.7

0.50 2.13 +0 .07  

> −0.08

0.29 +0 .04  

> −0.04

2.046 6.07 pdf |ppc 0.0593 (5.63) 4.16 +1 .03  

> −0.54

79 .8+5 .4 

> −8.2

82 .0+5 .0 

> −5.7

0.80 2.12 +0 .07  

> −0.06

0.29 +0 .03  

> −0.04

0.213 5.55 pdf |ppc 0.0436 (4.14) 3.41 +0 .51  

> −0.15

57 .7+11 .6 

> −6.3

71 .9+10 .0 

> −7.8

0.50 2.14 +0 .08  

> −0.07

0.28 +0 .04  

> −0.05

0.536 4.94 pdf |ppc 0.0436 (4.14) 5.65 +0 .88  

> −0.46

77 .6+4 .9 

> −5.9

81 .5+5 .7 

> −5.5

0.80 2.13 +0 .06  

> −0.05

0.29 +0 .02  

> −0.03

0.536 4.52 pdf |ppc 

Before turning to the inferred geometries, it is helpful to state clearly what the data do and do not support. Using the stellar density from K. Masuda et al. (2024), the transit-inferred value is higher than the isochrone-based estimate by 2 .9σ for Kepler-51b and by 0 .6σ for Kepler-51d. Only the former constitutes a meaningful (though still sub-detection) preference for a positive PR offset; Kepler-51d alone remains compatible with no ef-fect. We also emphasize that these significance levels depend substantially on the choice of stellar characteri-zation—the T. A. Berger et al. (2023) posterior instead implies 2 .0σ and 1 .1σ—so at present the stellar den-sity, rather than the photometry, is the main limiting factor for Kepler-51b. Accordingly, the ring retrieval above should be interpreted in two complementary ways: both as a complete, worked example of the PR frame-work—here applied to real data for the first time—and as a null-result style exclusion test. The non-detection of a large density offset is itself an informative constraint, ruling out a wide swath of ring parameter space, partic-ularly extended, optically thick, highly inclined systems that would generate the strongest photometric signals. In our view, the fact that such constraints can be drawn from a decade-old archival photometric dataset, without any dedicated space-based follow-up, is the most gener-ally applicable result of this study. Our Bayesian retrievals identify ring configurations that can replicate the complete set of derived transit ob-servables for both planets, as obtained from a photomet-ric fit with independent transit times, i.e. PhotoFIT.. However, these solutions require both ρ⋆, true and b in-consistent with their current best external constraints from T. A. Berger et al. (2023) and K. Masuda et al. (2024), preventing a fully self-consistent ring solution from Kepler photometry alone. This reflects the intrin-sic degeneracy of the problem: numerical convergence toward compatible ring geometries does not guarantee physical viability, which ultimately depends on tighter independent constraints. It is important emphasizing that our analysis is not a direct fit of a ringed-planet transit model to the Kepler 

light curves. Instead, it is based on the global transit observables set ( ρ⋆, obs , δ, T 14 , T 23 , b obs , (a/R ⋆)obs ), which captures only part of the information contained in the full transit morphology. A direct fit to the photometry, ideally performed jointly with a dynamical TTV model, would exploit the detailed ingress and egress shape and any residual signatures to further constrain the ring ge-ometry and break some of the remaining parameter de-generacies in our analysis. Although we do not obtain a fully self-consistent ring solution, our preferred retrievals for both planets converge toward ring systems with variable extensions (fe ≈ 1.3–6 .2 Rp for Kepler-51b and fe ≈ 1.3–3 .9 Rp for Kepler-51d), moderately inclined ring planes ( iR ≈ 50 ◦–80 ◦), and similarly moderate projected tilts ( θR ≈ 60 ◦–80 ◦). Among the explored solutions, we favor this con-figuration over either nearly edge-on or face-on geome-tries, as it is also more consistent with current theo-retical expectations for ring formation and long-term stability (see e.g., R. M. Canup 2010; A. Crida et al. 2019; P. R. Estrada & R. H. Durisen 2023; M. Saillen-fest et al. 2023). The ring interpretation further suggests a potential detectability bias. As illustrated by our for-ward model and PhotoRing -effect map (Figure 5), the strongest photometric signatures arise from large, opti-cally thick rings observed at high obliquity. The con-figurations preferred by our retrieval instead occupy a region of parameter space where the expected photo-metric signatures are comparatively weaker. If similar 20 

Figure 7. Same as Figure 6 but for Kepler-51d. 21 ring geometries are common among exoplanets, current searches would be intrinsically less sensitive to them, suggesting that at least part of the apparent lack of con-firmed exoplanetary rings may arise from observational selection effects rather than from genuinely low ring oc-currence rates. The anomalous bulk densities under the ring hypoth-esis neither exclude alternative explanations for the in-flated radii of the Kepler-51 planets nor are they mutu-ally exclusive with them. Atmospheric inflation mech-anisms such as high-altitude hazes, primordial H/He envelopes, or a young evolutionary state remain viable scenarios (J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. 2020; L. Wang & F. Dai 2019; C. Lammers & J. N. Winn 2024). Simi-larly, while the flat transmission spectra observed with HST and JWST are commonly attributed to aerosols that mute molecular features (J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. 2025), an optically thick ring system could produce the same effect by attenuating stellar light achromatically. Distinguishing between these interpretations would re-quire detecting wavelength-dependent ring scattering in reflected light, potentially including polarimetric signa-tures as predicted by A. K. Veenstra et al. (2025). More generally, a planet with an extended atmosphere and an inclined ring system would appear doubly in-flated, with both effects contributing to the observed transit depth. As revealed by our grid search, the in-ferred bulk densities can increase by modest factors of 

∼ 2–5 in some local probability maxima, which still leaves the planets substantially less dense than typi-cal sub-Neptunes. However, we also find equally valid configurations with significantly smaller planetary radii where the bulk density increases by factors of ∼ 15– 100, placing them well within the typical density range of volatile-rich or even rocky planets. This multimodal density landscape suggests that rings, if present, could contribute to the super-puff phenomenon depending on the exact system geometry. An important advantage of asterodensity profiling is its computational efficiency, as deriving ρ⋆, obs requires only the fundamental transit observables ( δ, T 14 , T 23 , P ). This makes the PhotoRing diagnostic readily applicable to the full population of super-puff planets discovered by 

Kepler and K2 without dedicated ring-transit modeling. While multi-planet architectures offer a distinct advan-tage by allowing the cross-testing of inter-planetary in-consistencies in ρ⋆, obs , single-planet systems require a far more exhaustive analysis due to the lack of baseline ref-erences for contrast. Nevertheless, any system display-ing such inter-planetary discrepancies, similar to those identified here, remains a prime target for detailed ring retrieval analyses. The case of HIP-41378f already pro-vides the closest precedent, as its super-puff-like density was reconciled with an inclined ring system capable of inflating the apparent transit radius (B. Akinsanmi et al. 2020). If PhotoRing offsets are found to be common among super-puffs, this would support the idea that un-resolved ring systems contribute systematically to their apparent radius inflation, with important implications for sub-Neptune occurrence rates and their theoretical formation models. More broadly, the inference framework developed here, combining PhotoFIT-based asterodensity pro-filing, a geometric ringed-planet transit model, and Bayesian retrieval, is readily transferable to other sys-tems requiring only posterior distributions for the tran-sit observables and an independent estimate of ρ⋆, true .Its main limitation is the photometric cadence required to resolve ingress and egress morphology. In the near term, existing JWST observations offer the most promis-ing opportunity to test this scenario: JWST can directly constrain b from resolved contact slopes, and its spectro-scopic capabilities (along with ARIEL’s), can simulta-neously probe its atmospheric properties. The upcom-ing high-precision observations from PLATO (F. Ma-tuszewski et al. 2023) for thousands of cold Jupiters will also enable systematic searches for ring signatures, improving TTV-based mass constraints, and identifying planets with anomalously low bulk densities. DATA AVAILABILITY All the data necessary to reproduce the results and recreate the figures in this work—including the Jupyter 

notebooks used for model training and evaluation—are publicly accessible at https://github.com/seap-udea/ PRisma (PhotoRing inference and modeling algorithm). We anticipate that this project will provide a foundation for future implementations of the PR inference pipeline proposed in this paper. Contributions from the commu-nity are encouraged. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work has been possible due to the availability of open-source, general-purpose Python packages, includ-ing Matplotlib (J. D. Hunter 2007), Numpy (C. R. Harris et al. 2020), Scipy (P. Virtanen et al. 2020), 

mpi4py (L. Dalcin & Y.-L. L. Fang 2021) and pandas 

(W. McKinney et al. 2010), dynesty (J. S. Speagle 2020) and emcee (D. Foreman-Mackey et al. 2013). JAAM ac-knowledges support from the Macquarie University Re-search Fellowship (MQRF). 22 

Figure 8. Posterior predictive checks (PPCs) for Kepler-51b and Kepler-51d in the full-set retrieval setup. PPCs compare the model-predicted distribution (blue) with the photometrically derived posterior (grey) for each transit observable. The reported values of W1 and E (see main text) quantify the self-consistent goodness-of-fit between the ringed-planet model and the observed transit observables. 23 APPENDIX  

> A.

ANALYTICAL DERIVATION OF RING CONTACT POSITIONS USING THE SUPPORT FUNCTION A.1. Error Analysis of the 2015 Analytical Formula 

In the original formulation of the PhotoRing effect by J. I. Zuluaga et al. (2015), calculating the exact tempo-ral contact points between a stellar limb and a projected exoplanetary ring requires solving a non-linear system of trigonometric equations. The previous analytical approximation assumed a highly elongated ellipse ( A ≫ B) and small contact angles, leading to geometrical artifacts at high projected tilts ( θR ≳ 60 ◦) and high inclinations. To illustrate this, Figure 9 compares the PhotoRing effect contours generated by the precise semi-analytical model 

geotrans with those produced by the original exorings analytical approximation from J. I. Zuluaga et al. (2015). As shown, the original formulation breaks down in certain inclination ranges, creating unphysical artifacts.          

> Figure 9. Comparison of the PhotoRing effect contours for Kepler-51b using the original exorings analytical approximation from J. I. Zuluaga et al. (2015) (left) and the precise semi-analytical model geotrans (right). The original model exhibits geometrical artifacts at certain high projected tilts and inclinations. You can compare the panel on the right with Figure 5, which was obtained using the refined analytical model presented in this appendix.

To provide a robust, exact-like analytical solution suitable for computationally intensive sampling (e.g., Nested Sampling), we reframe the contact geometry using the Minkowski Addition and the Support Function of a convex body (R. Schneider 1993). A.2. Theoretical Framework: The Support Function 

Geometrically, the contact between the stellar disk (a circle of radius R∗ = 1) and the projected ring (an ellipse with semi-axes A, B rotated by θR) occurs when the distance between their centers equals the sum of their effective radii in the direction of contact. For a convex shape, the distance from its center to a tangent line perpendicular to a given normal vector ⃗n is defined by its Support Function, h(⃗n). For an ellipse aligned with the coordinate axes, the support function is: 

h(⃗n) = 

q

A2n2 

> x

+ B2n2 

> y

(A1) A graphical representation of these geometric quantities and the contact positions used in this derivation is provided in Figure 10. 24   

> Figure 10. Illustration of the quantities involved in the analytical model for two configurations: one where the rings are oriented coinciding with the coordinate system (left/top), and another where the rings are oriented with an inclination and projected tilt (right/bottom).

When the ellipse is rotated by an angle θR (the projected ring tilt), the normal vector must be rotated into the ellipse’s local frame. The unit vectors defining the major and minor axes are: ˆuA = (cos θR, sin θR), ˆuB = ( − sin θR, cos θR)The directional effective radius of the rotated ring is then: 

h(⃗n) = pA2(⃗n · ˆu A)2 + B2(⃗n · ˆu B )2 (A2) A.3. The Unperturbed Normal Approximation 

To avoid solving for the exact contact normal iteratively, we make a highly accurate physical approximation: the normal vector at the point of contact is nearly identical to the normal vector if the planet were a spherical point-mass. For a point-mass transit with an impact parameter b, the contact points on the stellar limb have the coordinates 

y = b and x = ±√1 − b2. Therefore, the normal vectors at the egress (trailing, R) and ingress (leading, L) contacts are simply: ⃗n R =



+p1 − b2, b 



(A3) ⃗n L =



−p1 − b2, b 



(A4) Let x0 = √1 − b2. We can now evaluate the Support Function of the ring in these two specific directions to obtain the effective contact radii, hR and hL.Projecting ⃗n R onto the ellipse axes yields the egress effective radius: ⃗n R · ˆuA = x0 cos θR + b sin θR⃗n R · ˆuB = −x0 sin θR + b cos θR25 Squaring and substituting into the support function gives: 

h2 

> R

= A2(x0 cos θR + b sin θR)2

+ B2(b cos θR − x0 sin θR)2 (A5) Similarly, for the ingress effective radius ( hL): ⃗n L · ˆuA = −x0 cos θR + b sin θR⃗n L · ˆuB = x0 sin θR + b cos θR

Yielding: 

h2 

> L

= A2(−x0 cos θR + b sin θR)2

+ B2(b cos θR + x0 sin θR)2 (A6) A.4. Final Contact Equations 

With the effective geometrical radii hR and hL defined, the complex ring behaves instantaneously like a sphere of radius hL,R . We substitute these directional radii into the standard spherical contact equations. The four contact positions along the x-axis are therefore given exactly by: 

Ingress Contacts (Left): 

xR, 1 ≈ − p(1 + hL)2 − b2 (First contact, external) (A7) 

xR, 2 ≈ − pmax(0 , [1 − hL]2 − b2) (Second contact, internal) (A8) 

Egress Contacts (Right): 

xR, 3 ≈ +pmax(0 , [1 − hR]2 − b2) (Third contact, internal) (A9) 

xR, 4 ≈ +p(1 + hR)2 − b2 (Fourth contact, external) (A10) The argument of the square root for internal contacts ( xR, 2, x R, 3) is bounded to ≥ 0 to properly handle grazing configurations where a full interior transit does not occur. REFERENCES 

Aizawa, M., Masuda, K., Kawahara, H., & Suto, Y. 2018, AJ, 155, 206, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aab9a1 Akinsanmi, B., Santos, N. C., Faria, J. P., et al. 2020, A&A, 635, L8, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202037618 Arnold, L., & Schneider, J. 2004, A&A, 420, 1153, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20035720 Bakos, G., Noyes, R., Kov´ acs, G., et al. 2007, The Astrophysical Journal, 656, 552 Ballesteros, F. J., Arnalte-Mur, P., Fernandez-Soto, A., & Mart´ ınez, V. J. 2018, MNRAS, 473, L21, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slx105 Barnes, J. W., & Fortney, J. J. 2004, ApJ, 616, 1193, doi: 10.1086/425067 Berger, T. A., Schlieder, J. E., & Huber, D. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2301.11338, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2301.11338 Braga-Ribas, F., Sicardy, B., Ortiz, J. L., et al. 2014, Nature, 508, 72, doi: 10.1038/nature13155 Brown, T. M., Charbonneau, D., Gilliland, R. L., Noyes, R. W., & Burrows, A. 2001, ApJ, 552, 699, doi: 10.1086/320580 Canup, R. M. 2010, Nature, 468, 943, doi: 10.1038/nature09661 Charnoz, S., Dones, L., Esposito, L. W., Estrada, P. R., & Hedman, M. M. 2009, in Saturn from Cassini-Huygens, ed. M. K. Dougherty, L. W. Esposito, & S. M. Krimigis, 537, doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-9217-6 17 Crida, A., Charnoz, S., Hsu, H.-W., & Dones, L. 2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 967, doi: 10.1038/s41550-019-0876-y Dalcin, L., & Fang, Y.-L. L. 2021, Computing in Science & Engineering, 23, 47 Dawson, R. I., & Johnson, J. A. 2012, ApJ, 756, 122, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/756/2/122 26 

Domingos, R. C., Winter, O. C., & Yokoyama, T. 2006, MNRAS, 373, 1227, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2006.11104.x Estrada, P. R., & Durisen, R. H. 2023, Icarus, 400, 115296, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115296 Feroz, F., Hobson, M. P., & Bridges, M. 2009, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 398, 1601, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.14548.x Feroz, F., Hobson, M. P., Cameron, E., & Pettitt, A. N. 2019, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 2, 10, doi: 10.21105/astro.1306.2144 Follette, K. B. 2023, PASP, 135, 093001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/aceb31 Foreman-Mackey, D., Hogg, D. W., Lang, D., & Goodman, J. 2013, PASP, 125, 306, doi: 10.1086/670067 Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357, doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2 Heising, M. Z., Marcy, G. W., & Schlichting, H. E. 2015, ApJ, 814, 81, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/814/1/81 Heising, M. Z., Marcy, G. W., & Schlichting, H. E. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 814, 81 Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in Science and Engineering, 9, 90, doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55 Kenworthy, M. A., & Mamajek, E. E. 2015, ApJ, 800, 126, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/800/2/126 Kipping, D. M. 2014, MNRAS, 440, 2164, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu318 Kipping, D. M., Dunn, W. R., Jasinski, J. M., & Manthri, V. P. 2012, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 421, 1166 Lammers, C., & Winn, J. N. 2024, ApJL, 977, L1, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad91ae Lecavelier des Etangs, A., H´ ebrard, G., Blandin, S., et al. 2017, A&A, 603, A115, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201730554 Lee, E. J., & Chiang, E. 2016, ApJ, 817, 90, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/817/2/90 Libby-Roberts, J. E., Berta-Thompson, Z. K., D´ esert, J.-M., et al. 2020, AJ, 159, 57, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5d36 Libby-Roberts, J. E., Bello-Arufe, A., Berta-Thompson, Z. K., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2505.21358, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2505.21358 Mamajek, E. E., Quillen, A. C., Pecaut, M. J., et al. 2012, AJ, 143, 72, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/143/3/72 Masuda, K. 2014, ApJ, 783, 53, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/783/1/53 Masuda, K., Libby-Roberts, J. E., Livingston, J. H., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 294, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad83d3 Matuszewski, F., Nettelmann, N., Cabrera, J., B¨ orner, A., & Rauer, H. 2023, A&A, 677, A133, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202245287 McKinney, W., et al. 2010, scipy, 445, 51 Millholland, S. C., & Winn, J. N. 2025, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122, e2416189122 Morgado, B. E., Sicardy, B., Braga-Ribas, F., et al. 2023, Nature, 614, 239, doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-05629-6 Ohta, Y., Taruya, A., & Suto, Y. 2009, ApJ, 690, 1, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/690/1/1 Ortiz, J. L., Santos-Sanz, P., Sicardy, B., et al. 2017, Nature, 550, 219, doi: 10.1038/nature24051 Ortiz, J. L., Pereira, C. L., Sicardy, B., et al. 2023, A&A, 676, L12, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347025 Osborn, H. P., Rodriguez, J. E., Kenworthy, M. A., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 471, 740, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1249 Piro, A. L., & Vissapragada, S. 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 159, 131 Ramdas, A., Trillos, N. G., & Cuturi, M. 2017, Entropy, 19, 47, doi: 10.3390/e19020047 Saillenfest, M., Sulis, S., Charpentier, P., & Santerne, A. 2023, A&A, 675, A174, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202346745 Santos, N. C., Martins, J. H. C., Bou´ e, G., et al. 2015, A&A, 583, A50, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201526673 Schneider, R. 1993, Convex bodies: the Brunn-Minkowski theory, Vol. 151 (Cambridge university press Cambridge) Scott, D. W. 1992, Multivariate Density Estimation: Theory, Practice, and Visualization (New York: John Wiley & Sons) Seager, S., & Mall´ en-Ornelas, G. 2003, ApJ, 585, 1038, doi: 10.1086/346105 Silverman, B. W. 1986, Monographs on Statistics and Applied Probability, Vol. 26, Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis (London: Chapman and Hall) Speagle, J. S. 2020, MNRAS, 493, 3132, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staa278 Sucerquia, M., Alvarado-Montes, J. A., Zuluaga, J. I., Montesinos, M., & Bayo, A. 2020, MNRAS, 496, L85, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slaa080 Umetani, T., Aizawa, M., Ezoe, Y., & Ishisaki, Y. 2025a, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, 77, 86 Umetani, T., Aizawa, M., Ezoe, Y., & Ishisaki, Y. 2025b, Publications of the Astronomical Society of Japan, 77, 86 Veenstra, A. K., Zuluaga, J. I., Alvarado-Montes, J. A., Sucerquia, M., & Stam, D. M. 2025, A&A, 693, A310, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202347194 Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261, doi: 10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2 27 

Wang, L., & Dai, F. 2019, ApJL, 873, L1, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab0653 Xystouris, G., Arridge, C. S., Morooka, M. M., & Wahlund, J.-E. 2023, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 526, 5839, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad2793 Zuluaga, J. I., Kipping, D. M., Sucerquia, M., & Alvarado, J. A. 2015, ApJL, 803, L14, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/803/1/L14 Zuluaga, J. I., Sucerquia, M., & Alvarado-Montes, J. A. 2022, Astronomy and Computing, 40, 100623, doi: 10.1016/j.ascom.2022.100623