Title: Comprehensive reconstruction of collider events with hypergraph representation learning and graph-conditioned diffusion

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.18928v1

Published Time: Thu, 17 Sep 2026 01:29:40 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Comprehensive reconstruction of collider events with hypergraph representation learning and graph-conditioned diffusion 

Lining Mao, 1 Yvonne Peters, 2 Ethan Simpson, 2, ∗ and Zihan Zhang 2, †

> 1

School of Physics and Astronomy, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, No.800 Dong Chuan Road, Shanghai 200240, PRC 

> 2

Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Manchester, Oxford Road, Manchester M13 9PL, UK 

(Dated: September 17, 2026) In particle collider experiments, event reconstruction is the task of inferring the kinematics of short-lived particles produced in the hard scatter from the stable final states recorded by detec-tors. We decompose event reconstruction into two primary tasks: assigning measured jets and charged leptons to parent particles, and predicting unmeasured neutrino kinematics. We present VyPER, a novel geometric learning framework that represents collider events as hypergraphs with a physics-inspired topology. VyPER combines the supervised classification of hyperedges for par-ticle assignment with a diffusion model for predicting neutrino kinematics, leveraging a joint loss function to optimize both reconstruction tasks within a unified framework. We showcase VyPER across several proton–proton collision processes, comparing its performance to existing analytical and machine-learning-based reconstruction techniques. In doing so, we demonstrate that accurate event reconstruction is achievable across a diverse range of Standard Model physics processes, open-ing new avenues for precision measurements in the Higgs boson, electroweak, and top-quark sectors. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Experiments at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN [1] collide protons at high energies to measure properties of Standard Model (SM) particles and search for signs of physics beyond the SM. The kinematics of the heavy, short-lived particles produced in the initial high-energy interaction — the hard scatter — serve as a critical probe into underlying SM dynamics and a vital tool for uncovering subtle deviations from known physics. Observables constructed from the kinematics of these short-lived particles are used to probe the spins and po-larizations of heavy fermions [2] and bosons [3]; such mea-surements provide insight into the CP properties of Higgs boson couplings [4], the mechanism of electroweak sym-metry breaking [5], and the nature of quantum correla-tions between SM constituents [6, 7]. Unfolded differen-tial cross-sections of top quark kinematics provide direct comparison to fixed-order predictions of the SM [8, 9]. Such observables even enhance the separation of signal processes from complex backgrounds [10, 11], and may be beneficial to experimental calibration procedures [12]. Heavy states produced in the hard scatter of proton-proton collisions decay almost instantly, preventing di-rect measurement of their properties. General purpose detectors [13, 14] instead record the signals left by their stable or long-lived decay products. These signals are reconstructed into calibrated final-state objects like jets and charged leptons for physics analysis. Measuring ob-servables constructed from the kinematics of the parent particles can provide greater sensitivity and physical in-terpretability than measurements restricted to only the   

> ∗ethan.simpson@manchester.ac.uk
> †zihan.zhang@manchester.ac.uk

kinematics of the recorded final states. Thus, the utility and physics reach of parent particle observables motivate developing accurate “event reconstruction” techniques. With the advent of powerful machine learning (ML) architectures, substantial performance gains have been realized in event reconstruction. Such models have gen-erally focused on specific sub-tasks within event recon-struction, limiting their applicability to specific physics processes. The utility of event reconstruction across the gamut of SM measurements remains under-explored. In this paper, we showcase the potential of event reconstruc-tion in top-quark, Higgs boson and electroweak physics processes, and present VyPER, a dedicated ML model designed to provide comprehensive event reconstruction in a variety of proton-proton scattering processes. 

II. PROBLEM SPECIFICATION AND STATE OF THE ART 

The goal of event reconstruction is to estimate the four-momenta of the parent particles whose decays led to the observed final state. Different approaches and challenges exist depending on the scattering process in question and the decay modes of the particles we wish to reconstruct. In this section, we discuss how event reconstruction can be broken down into two separate tasks: final-state as-signment and neutrino prediction. We highlight current methods in the literature built to perform each task. 

A. Jet and charged lepton assignment 

Jets and charged leptons produced in the decays of heavy, short-lived particles can be recorded with high-efficiency over almost the entire fiducial phase space at arXiv:2609.18928v1 [hep-ph] 16 Sep 2026 2general-purpose detectors like ATLAS [13] and CMS [14]. The assignment task associates these recorded decay products to their parent particle, partitioning the set of all measured final states into groups corresponding to the specific decay products of each parent 1. Summing the four-momenta of the final states in each partition then defines the parent’s kinematics. Traditionally solved through χ2–minimization tech-niques [15], machine learning approaches to the assign-ment problem have become a hot topic in high-energy physics studies and represent the state-of-the-art. The majority of ML-based event reconstruction models use supervised classification to assign jets and charged lep-tons to parent particles. This requires recorded final-state objects to be uniquely labeled, typically through angular matching of the detector-level objects to the de-cay products of the parent particles within the simulation truth record. A variety of transformer [16–20], message-passing graph-based [21, 22] and joint transformer-graph [23, 24] architectures are available in the literature. Relevant to this study are the HyPER model [21] upon which the VyPER architecture is built, and the SPANet model [16–18] which has long served as the benchmark in assignment studies, and provides comparison to VyPER in Sections V and VII. A short review of the individual approaches each takes to event reconstruction is given in Appendix C. Alternative unsupervised methods formulate a learn-ing task that does not rely on simulation truth labels. Approaches include training autoencoders directly on ex-perimental data [25], and reformulating assignment as a sequential Markov decision process solved via reinforce-ment learning using a transformer-based agent [26]. Such approaches are not considered in this paper.  

> B. Neutrino reconstruction

Final states involving neutrinos pose a different chal-lenge, as collider detectors [13, 14] are not designed to detect these weakly interacting particles. Through con-servation of momentum in the transverse plane and ju-dicious measurement of all detector activity, the missing transverse momentum ( Emiss  

> T

or “MET”) quantity can be built. This serves as a proxy for unmeasured neutrino ac-tivity in the transverse plane in physics processes where no other unmeasurable final states are produced. The second task in event reconstruction is to infer neu-trino kinematics using the visible final states and miss-ing transverse momentum. The task is formidable, since it represents an inverse problem which is frequently ill-posed: the measured final-state kinematics provide only  

> 1Decay products produced outside the detector’s fiducial accep-tance are not recorded, which can lead to incomplete associa-tions.

incomplete constraints on the unobserved neutrino de-grees of freedom, and the underlying distribution of neu-trino kinematics can be highly non-Gaussian and multi-modal. Traditional solution methods introduce physical as-sumptions — such as assuming collinearity of the decay products or imposing known mass constraints on inter-mediate resonances — to construct a closed system of kinematic equations [27–31]. A major limitation of these approaches is that experimental smearing of jet kinemat-ics often produces equations with unphysical, complex-valued solutions. Further, multiple real-valued solutions are inherently degenerate, requiring a specific choice of solution to be made. Such techniques are by defini-tion topology-specific, applicable only in systems with sufficient kinematic constraint, and fail to scale to pro-cesses with additional final-state neutrinos. This moti-vates the development of alternative methods that cir-cumvent these shortcomings. Generative ML techniques are increasingly used in par-ticle physics for the prediction of continuous kinematic quantities [32–34], and have recently been applied to neutrino prediction. The ν-flows model [35] applied a conditional normalizing flow architecture [36, 37] in the 

t¯t 1-lepton channel, where the normalizing flow is con-ditioned by a transformer encoder that takes measured event information as input. The ν2-flows model [38] ex-tended this method to two neutrino solutions in the t¯t

2-lepton channel, showing that generative ML techniques can compete with the traditional reconstruction tech-niques while providing solutions for all events. More re-cently, diffusion architectures tackle neutrino reconstruc-tion in τ ¯τ production, where they are shown to improve the resolution of the di-tau invariant mass spectrum com-pared to existing non-machine learning techniques [39].  

> C. Towards full event reconstruction

Algorithms for event reconstruction have generally fo-cused on only one of the above reconstruction tasks, or have been designed with specific collider processes in mind. Developments to the SPANet architecture introduced a regression head targeting the t¯t 1-lepton topology [18]. The model was trained to predict a sin-gle neutrino’s longitudinal momentum and the invariant mass of the t¯t system. This constituted a first step to-wards combined event reconstruction tasks, but by de-fault only applicable to this specific process. By fine-tuning a network pre-trained with both supervised and self-supervised tasks on a diverse set of collider processes, the EveNet foundation model authors studied combined assignment and neutrino regression downstream tasks in dileptonic t¯t production [40]. Alternative machine learn-ing approaches have considered directly regressing the parent particle kinematics in t¯t production without de-composing the problem into individual assignment and neutrino regression components [41, 42]. 3It is evident that the feasibility and physics reach of machine learning models capable of reconstructing short-lived particles in generic collider processes has not been fully explored. We present VyPER, the next evolution of the HyPER model, which builds upon the concept of event reconstruction using hypergraph representation learning, and is designed to be applicable to the recon-struction of arbitrary physics processes. 

III. METHODS 

VyPER is a graph-hypergraph network designed to solve both assignment and neutrino prediction tasks si-multaneously. Collider events are represented as hetero-geneous graphs with a specific physics-inspired topology: “invisible” neutrinos are included in the graph and con-nected only to particles with which they share a known common parent, as outlined in Section III A. The archi-tectural backbone of VyPER is based on the message-passing technique, discussed in Section III B. During this step, specially designed message-passing constructs learned latent representations of each neutrino. Assign-ment is performed through edge and hyperedge classifica-tion, as summarized in Section III C. In Section III D, we introduce the methodology for predicting neutrino kine-matics: we sample random noise and map these points to physical neutrino solutions by first learning the condi-tional mapping between that noise and the true neutrino kinematics using the diffusion paradigm. The condition-ing of this diffusion head relies on the neutrino latent representations constructed during the message-passing phase. We integrate these distinct tasks into a unified loss function, enabling simultaneous optimization of all learning objectives as discussed in Section III E. 

A. Graph representation of collider events 

Graphs are mathematical structures composed of points and connections. VyPER represents any col-lider event as a directed graph: G = ( V, E ), where V

is a set of nodes representing the final-state objects in the event, and E is a set of edges representing the di-rectional connections between them. Nodes are parti-tioned into two subsets: experimentally detectable fi-nal states Vexp and invisible final states Vinv , such that 

V = Vexp ∪ Vinv . Edges between detectable final states are defined as Eexp = {(i, j ) | i, j ∈ Vexp and i̸ = j} ⊆ E.Visible final states form the subgraph Gexp (Vexp , E exp ). We define V ∗ 

> exp

⊂ Vexp as the subset of visible final states that form a one-to-one correspondence with nodes in Vinv , where each pair originates from a common parent particle. For example, a neutrino and a charged lepton originating from the decay of a W boson form such a pair. This correspondence is defined by a bijection f :

V ∗

> exp
> bijection

−−−→ Vinv , such that their connecting edge set is Bidirectional edges Conditional edges 

> Structures:
> Electron Muon Neutrino Jet Hadronic top edge/hyperedge Leptonic top edge
> Target Structures:

FIG. 1. VyPER graph representation of a t¯tW event, where the measured final state consists of four jets and two leptons of identical electric charge. These final states are represented as nodes and connected with edges to form a complete graph. The neutrinos are known to arise from leptonic W boson de-cays and so are connected to their leptonic partner via “con-ditional edges”. The VyPER method ultimately identifies the edges and hyperedges whose nodes correspond to the W

boson and top quark decay products. The learned neutrino representations feed into a diffusion head that predicts their kinematics. 

defined as 

Einv = {(i, f (i)) | i ∈ V ∗

> exp

}, (1) where f (i) ∈ Vinv as the result of the bijection f . Ele-ments of Einv are termed conditional edges due to their specific role during message-passing. In the absence of neutrinos in the final state, where Vinv = ∅ and 

Einv = ∅, the VyPER event representation is identical to that of HyPER [21]: G ≡ Gexp .Following the procedure outlined in [21], the graph G is extended to a hypergraph H(V, X ) in cases where higher-order structures are necessary: hyperedges X represent resonant particles decaying into three or more final-state objects, enabling the capture of higher-order correlations among them. For example, the hadronic decays of a top quark ( t → bq ¯q′) can be represented as an O(3) hyper-edge. In this case, the set of all possible hyperedges is defined as: 

X = {{ i, j, k } | i, j, k ∈ Vexp , i ̸ = j, j ̸ = k, i ̸ = k}. (2) 4Neutrino Latent Creation Edge Update Node Update Global Update Neutrino Latent Creation Edge Update Node Update Global Update Neutrino Latent Creation 

Edge Update AdaLN 

Node Update 

Global Update S× (0) (0) (0) Concat Concat Concat Concat Concat Hyperedge Classification 

Edge Classification 

DiT DiT DiT ... 

T× 

# ... 

> Sampled Noise Neutrino Momentum
> Denoising 2153

# ,Edge Scores Hadronic W Leptonic Top Hadronic Top Hyperedge Scores 

FIG. 2. The VyPER network architecture. The backbone is a multi-layer message-passing framework that explores and updates the graph latent sapce by exchanging information between neighboring graph objects. Each message-passing layer leverages relational information encoded in the graph structure to construct neutrino latent representations and update edge, node and global feature vectors. The updated node, edge and global states from each layer are extracted and aggregated to perform edge classification, hyperedge classification, identifying the origins of each final-state object, while the constructed neutrino representations are used to condition the reverse diffusion process, which ultimately predicts neutrino momentum. 

B. Message-passing framework 

Building on advances in geometric deep learning, message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) have estab-lished themselves as one of the most effective approaches for learning graph representations [43–46]. VyPER uti-lizes the message-passing framework introduced in Hy-PER [21], which iteratively aggregates and propagates in-formation through the underlying graph structure to cap-ture the kinematic relations between final states. In Hy-PER, a standard MPNN layer consisted of three sequen-tial operations that updated the edge, node, and global attributes, respectively [21, 44]. Extending this approach to accommodate neutrinos, VyPER leverages its graph representation (Section III A) to introduce an additional message-passing operation that constructs a latent repre-sentation ˜ xk for each neutrino k ∈ Vinv . These latents are critical to the reverse diffusion process, as they condition the reconstruction of neutrino momenta (Section III D). During each message-passing layer s, VyPER com-putes a latent representation ˜ xk for each neutrino k ∈

Vinv , by first aggregating information at its companion node, and then updating its representation based on ag-gregating information from the other neutrino latents: ˜x(s)  

> i=f−1(k)

= h(s)1,θ 



x(s) 

> i

, a(s) 

> i

, u(s)

, (3) ˜x(s)  

> i=f−1(k)

← h(s)2,θ 



˜x(s) 

> i

, g(s)

where i ∈ V ∗ 

> exp

, (4) where x(s) 

> i

contains the node features of the i-th node, and u(s) is a vector of global features. The input event features used are defined in Appendix A 1. Learnable functions h(s) 

> ·,θ

are implemented as Multilayer Percep-trons (MLPs), and terms in parenthesis are concatenated. The variable ai is calculated by summarizing attributes of local graph structures, including each adjacent node, 

j ∈ Vexp , and directed edge ( i, j ) ∈ Eexp (denoted j → i): 

a(s) 

> i

= M 

> ∀j:j→i

h(s)3,θ 



x(s) 

> i

, x(s) 

> j

, e(s)

> j→i



, (5) where operator ⊕ denotes summation, and e(s) 

> j→i

is an edge embedding whose inputs at s = 0 are also given in Appendix A 1. The term g(s) is derived from the sum of all initialized neutrino latents, so as to capture the relations between them: 

g(s) = h(s)4,θ 

"M

> ∀i

(˜ x(s) 

> i

, u(s))

#

. (6) 5To enable robust integration between the generative neutrino prediction task and the graph-based tasks of edge and hyperedge classification, the created neutrino latent vectors are propagated back to their companion nodes as messages: 

x(s) 

> i

←

h

1 + h(s)5,θ (x(s) 

> i

)

i

⊙ x(s)

> i

+

h

1 + h(s)6,θ (x(s) 

> i

)

i

⊙ ˜x(s) 

> i

+ h(s)7,θ (x(s) 

> i

) , (7) where ⊙ denotes element-wise product. This technique is inspired by Adaptive Layer Normalization (AdaLN) modulation [47], and we refer to this mechanism as con-ditional message-passing . The learned neutrino latents condition the diffusion head described in Section III D. After creating the neutrino latents and propagating them to the rest of the graph, the network proceeds with the remaining message-passing steps, updating the edge, node, and global features using the procedure outlined in [21]. These message-passing operations are only ap-plied on the sub-graph Gexp . The entire procedure — conditional message-passing for neutrino latent construc-tion and traditional message-passing to contextualize the visible graph elements — is repeated S times, where S is a tunable hyperparameter.  

> C. Edge and hyperedge classification

VyPER performs edge and hyperedge classification to identify the specific set of nodes that constitute the de-cay products of a given parent particle. Edge classifica-tion uses learned edge representations to pinpoint specific final-state pairs stemming from two-body decays. Latent edge representations e(s) 

> ij

from each message-passing layer 

s are concatenated across all S message-passing steps and passed through an MLP. A softmax is then applied to give a predicted soft probability e′ 

> ij

∈ [0 , 1] Ce across Ce

target classes, for each edge ( i, j ) ∈ Eexp :

e′ 

> ij

= Softmax 

"

MLP 

> S
> s=1

e(s)

> ij

!# 

, (8) where represents concatenation. Each class corre-sponds to a specific intermediate particle, and the model is trained to predict the correct class for each edge through cross-entropy loss. The highest scoring edge within that class is selected as its reconstruction can-didate. Classifying edges is applicable only to two-body de-cays. Hyperedge classification generalizes the approach to reconstruct parent particles with three or more decay products. To effectively capture the multipartite correla-tions between final states, well-formed hyperedge latent representations are essential. Given the set of possible hyperedges defined in Eq. 2, the embedding vm for hy-peredge m ∈ [1 , · · · , |X|] is constructed by aggregating the node and global embeddings accumulated across all message-passing iterations: 

vm = M

> l∈εm

MLP( 

> S
> s=1

x(s) 

> l

,

> S
> s=1

u(s))

!

, ∀εm ∈ X, (9) where εm represents the m-th hyperedge in X and L

> l∈εm

denotes summation across all nodes in the hyperedge m.We then compute a soft probability for each hyperedge over all classes: 

v′ 

> m

= Softmax MLP( Am ⊙ ReLU( vmWT 

> θ

), vm) (10) where vm ∈ [0 , 1] CX is the predicted soft probability vec-tor for hyperedge εm ∈ X over CX classes, and WT 

> θ

is a matrix of trainable weights. The soft-attention coeffi-cient vector Am is computed via a per-feature softmax evaluated across all |X| hyperedges: 

Am = exp ( vm) ⊘



> |X|

M

> n=1

exp ( vn)

 , (11) where ⊘ denotes element-wise division. Each element in 

Am lies in [0 , 1] and represents a feature-wise importance score computed relative to all |X| hyperedges. Across all distinct classes, the hyperedge with the highest score within each class is selected as a candidate, analogous to the process of edge selection.  

> D. Neutrino prediction through diffusion

Generative ML architectures offer an attractive ap-proach to predicting neutrino kinematics, as unlike mod-els trained to regress a single kinematic solution, they can approximate the full conditional posterior distribu-tion of neutrino kinematics for a given measured final state. Framing neutrino prediction as generative mod-eling allows the network to learn a probability density over the neutrino kinematics conditioned on the mea-sured event information, which can then be sampled to produce candidate neutrinos. Diffusion-based approaches [48–50] are known to excel at modeling complex, multi-modal distributions while by-passing the architectural restrictions of other generative models to ensure stable training and high-fidelity pre-dictions [51, 52]. Diffusion models are defined by two complementary processes: the forward process progres-sively degrades the truth-level target (the true neutrino kinematics) towards random noise, and the reverse pro-cess employs a neural network that learns how to reverse the forward corruption. At inference, this learned reverse process is then applied to sampled noise to generate can-didate neutrino predictions. VyPER adopts the Denois-ing Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) approach [50], an implementation of diffusion well-known for its efficiency during inference. 6Let q(z0) denote the underlying true distribution of standardized neutrino kinematics. Given a neutrino 

z0 ∼ q(z0), the DDIM approach defines a non-Markovian forward process that corrupts z0 to noise over T steps. Instead of simulating this corruption sequentially during training, the noised neutrino latent zt at arbitrary snap-shot timestep t can be evaluated directly in closed form using the relation 

zt = √¯αtz0 + √1 − ¯αt ϵt, (12) where ϵt is a sampled noise vector. The hyperparameter ¯αt = Qtn=1 αn controls the noise schedule; it is bounded in (0 , 1] and monotonically decreases as t increases. In this work, the trajectory of ¯ αt is parameterized following a cosine schedule [53]. The reverse process inverts the forward corruption de-fined in Eq. 12 by establishing a deterministic mapping from zt to zt−1:

zt−1 = √¯αt−1

 zt − √1 − ¯αtϵθ (zt)

√¯αt



+p1 − ¯αt−1 ϵθ (zt). (13) where ϵθ (zt) is an estimation of the noise added in the forward process. We employ the diffusion transformer ar-chitecture [54], now standard in the generative ML liter-ature, to predict the noise added for a given the neutrino latent at time t:

ϵθ (zt) := DiT( zt, ˜x′) , (14) where ˜ x′ is a context vector encoding the measured event information. Each neutrino has a unique context vector constructed from its latent representations built during the message-passing process (Eq. 3 and Eq. 4): ˜x′ 

> k

= MLP 

" S

> s=1

˜x(s)

> k

!

, Tθ (t)

#

, (15) where ˜ x(s) 

> k

represents its latent features at each message-passing step s, and Tθ (t) is a timestep embedding of matching dimensionality. The DiT architecture extends the standard transformer with AdaLN modulation [47], using the context vector to directly modulate the net-work’s internal representations at every layer rather than simply concatenating the context as an additional input. The network is trained by minimizing the mean-squared error between the predicted and ground-truth noise: 

Ldiffusion = ∥ϵθ (zt) − ϵt∥ 2. (16) Upon convergence, the learned distribution pθ (z0) should approximate the true neutrino momentum distribution 

q(z0). At inference, the trained VyPER model starts from pure noise and uses the learned DDIM trajecto-ries to denoise a sampled point into a realistic neutrino candidate, given the context defined by the input event features.  

> E. Learning objectives

All learning tasks are unified into a single loss function, given for each individual graph by 

L = η ¯Ldffusion + (1 − η)[ α ¯LX + (1 − α) ¯LE], (17) where Ldiffusion is the diffusion loss formulated in Eq. 16; 

LX and LE correspond to the hyperedge and edge classifi-cation losses, respectively, computed using cross-entropy. The bar notation, ¯L, denotes averaging over the corre-sponding elements (neutrinos, edges or hyperedges) in each graph. The two hyperparameters η, α ∈ [0 , 1] are loss scales for the diffusion and hyperedge components, respectively. Training is performed with the Adam optimizer [55]. A list of hyperparameter configurations used in the fol-lowing experiments is detailed in the Appendix A 2.   

> IV. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND EVALUATION A. Physics processes

We investigate the fundamental feasibility of event re-construction across a series of Standard Model physics processes. Our goal is to demonstrate that highly ac-curate event reconstruction is possible across diverse physics processes and final states, including those in which full reconstruction has never before been applied in the literature. We position the VyPER model as a unified framework that can accomplish this task. We consider four distinct physics processes. First, the production of top-antitop quark pairs decaying into the dileptonic final state, t¯t(2L), allows us to benchmark ma-chine learning models against established analytical re-construction algorithms. Second, the production of W

boson pairs in the electroweak sector — via either the decay of a Higgs boson produced through vector-boson fusion ( H → W W ∗) or vector-boson scattering (VBS 

W W ) — demonstrates how machine learning achieves full event reconstruction in under-constrained channels. Finally, the rare and complex production of a W bo-son in association with a top-antitop quark pair ( t¯tW )combines multiple combinatoric assignment tasks with neutrino prediction, offering a highly compelling chal-lenge for modern event reconstruction methods. Feyn-man diagrams for all four processes are shown in Fig-ure 3. These channels are chosen because they priori-tize different aspects of the reconstruction problem and span a wide range of kinematic constraints, from the 

t¯t system with all resonances on their mass shells, to the highly under-constrained VBS W W topology. Suc-cessfully reconstructing under-constrained topologies will demonstrate the capacity of ML models to learn im-plicit physics constraints and resolve under-determined systems that are algebraically intractable. 7We perform all studies using simulated data, where the generator-level truth record allows us to directly evalu-ate reconstruction performance through computing the efficiency of jet and charged lepton assignments, and by evaluating the similarity of predicted kinematic spectra to their true counterparts.                                   

> TABLE I. Overview of the four processes studied, detailing the channel and basic event selections, and the number of events used for training, testing and validation of all ML-based models.“2LOS” indicates the requirement of two lep-tons of opposite electric charge in the final state; “2LSS” in-dicates that both leptons have the same electric charge. Process Njet Nb-jet Channel Split Nevents
> t¯t2L ≥2≥22LOS Train 4,692,288 Val. 260,190 Test 261,557
> H→W W ∗≥2≥02LOS Train 4,765,195 Val. 266,844 Test 266,919 VBS W W ≥2≥02LSS Train 4,145,532 Val. 107,179 Test 106,491
> t¯tW 2L ≥4≥02LSS Train 4,907,261 Val. 272,740 Test 272,235
> B. Simulation and event selection

All physics processes are simulated at a center-of-mass energy of √s = 13 TeV. The hard-scattering matrix ele-ments are evaluated at next-to-leading-order (NLO) ac-curacy in quantum chromodynamics (QCD) and leading-order (LO) accuracy in the electroweak (EW) coupling using the MadGraph5 aMC@NLO framework (v3.5.7-LTS) [56]. The NLO five-flavour scheme parton distribu-tion function (PDF) set of NNPDF3.0nlo [57] is used. Decays of the top quark, W boson and Higgs boson are modeled using MadSpin [58]. Events are matched to Pythia8 (v8.313) [59] to simulate parton shower, hadronization, and multi-parton interactions. Detector response is simulated using Delphes (v3.5.0) [60], con-figured to be similar to that of the ATLAS detector. Jets are reconstructed using the anti-kt algorithm [61] with a radius parameter of R = 0 .4, as implemented in 

FastJet (v3.4.0) [62]. Jets are required to have a mini-mum pT of 25 GeV, and a minimum of 10 GeV is required for electrons and muons. Jets and electrons must satisfy 

|η| ≤ 2.5, and |η| ≤ 2.7 is required for muons. The iden-tification of jets originating from a B-hadron ( b-tagging) is performed by Delphes with a pT -dependent tagging efficiency based on [63]. All machine learning techniques tested employ super-vised learning tasks that rely on truth information for model training and evaluation of reconstruction perfor-mance. The momenta of the parton-level truth objects, such as top quarks, Higgs bosons, W bosons, and their decays, are extracted directly from the Pythia8 simu-lation record after QCD radiation. Particle assignment labels are established by matching reconstructed detec-tor objects to generator-level partons — the immediate products of parent parton decays — based on the an-gular distance metric ∆ R = p(∆ ϕ)2 + (∆ η)2. A jet is considered to have originated from a particular parton if the angular distance between them satisfies ∆ R < 0.4. Lepton matching is performed with a ∆ R threshold of 0.1. In cases where the detector-level lepton multiplicity exceeds that at truth level, the leading detector-level lep-tons are selected according to the truth-level multiplicity before matching. Table I lists the set of basic selections applied to each dataset to isolate the desired final state. We focus on fi-nal states with two leptons, as these decay channels pro-vide multiple neutrinos that present a testbed for neu-trino momentum prediction. Dileptonic final states can be characterized by the electric charge of the leptons. Both t¯t and H → W W ∗ processes produce parent parti-cles with opposite electric charge, giving a final state that has two oppositely charged leptons (2LOS). We study VBS W W production and t¯tW production in the chan-nel with two leptons of identical electric charge: the two-lepton same-sign (2LSS) channel.  

> C. Training and evaluation

The simulated datasets are split into independent training, validation, and testing sets, with the first two used for model training and in-training validation, re-spectively. Performance evaluation is conducted on the testing datasets; for processes where traditional, non-ML methods are available, they are likewise evaluated only on this common testing set. The number of events dedicated to training, validation and testing are quoted in Table I. Separate models are trained independently for each pro-cess 2. All datasets have been made publicly available [64] as outlined in Appendix F.  

> D. Performance metrics

The performance of an event reconstruction algorithm is inherently tied to the specific requirements of a given physics measurement. In an attempt to remain agnos-tic to any single downstream analysis, we evaluate our algorithms using a generic suite of performance markers.  

> 2Studies of transfer learning between processes is left as future work and to dedicated foundation models [40].

8                     

> t
> ¯tgg
> W+
> W-
> b
> ¯bl-¯νl
> l+
> νl
> (a)
> Hq1
> q2
> q′
> 1
> q′
> 2
> V∓
> V±
> W-
> W+
> l-¯νl
> l+
> νl
> (b)
> q1
> q2
> q′
> 1
> q′
> 2
> W±
> W±
> W±
> W±
> l-, ν l
> ¯νl, l +¯νl, l +
> l-, ν l
> (c)
> W-
> l-¯νl
> t
> ¯t
> W+
> W-
> bq1
> q2
> l-¯νl
> ¯bq
> ¯q′
> (d)
> FIG. 3. Representative diagrams at leading order in both QCD and electroweak couplings for the two-lepton final states of (a)
> t¯t, (b) VBF H→W W ∗, (c) same-sign VBS W W , and (d) same-sign dileptonic t¯tW .

a. Assignment efficiency: To quantify the perfor-mance of the assignment algorithms, we define assign-ment efficiency as the fraction of correctly reconstructed parent particles relative to the total number of target parents. A hadronic top quark is deemed correctly recon-structed if and only if both the b-jet and the W boson are also correctly assigned (with the permutation of the two jets in the W boson irrelevant in the HyPER assignment paradigm). 

b. Neutrino residuals: To quantify the performance of the neutrino prediction methods, we evaluate event-by-event differences between the true neutrino kinemat-ics and the predictions of each algorithm. Specifically, we present the mean ∆ R separation between the true and predicted vectors, alongside the root mean square error (RMSE) of the Cartesian momentum components. We also compute the residuals for each momentum compo-nent (e.g., pTruth  

> x

− pPred  

> x

) and extract the “effective in-terquantile resolution” (Res.) between the 15.87-th and 84.13-th percentiles. These specific quantiles are chosen because they bound the central 68.27% of the data, map-ping directly to the standard ±1σ intervals of a normal distribution to yield a 2 σ total width for the reported resolution. All four final states contain two neutrinos; consequently, the distributions are produced on a per-neutrino basis rather than per-event. For all evaluated metrics, smaller values indicate closer proximity to the truth and so superior reconstruction performance. 

c. Parent particle distributions: Distributions con-structed from reconstructed parent particle kinematics. We compare to “idealized reconstruction” distributions which are detector-level quantities built using detector-level object kinematics with true assignments and the true neutrino kinematics. The idealized reconstruction distributions represent the limiting case of perfect event reconstruction, and showcase each method’s ability to re-cover the shape of a particular observable. 

d. High-level observable comparison to truth: An event-by-event comparison between the prediction from each algorithm for a specific reconstructed observable, and a predefined truth definition of the observable as recorded in the simulation record. This can be rendered in one-dimension as a plot of the residuals, analogously to the neutrino kinematic residuals, or in two dimensions as a binned migration matrix which demonstrates the corre-lation and migration of events between detector-level and truth-level. We again employ the effective interquantile resolution (Res.) between the 15.87-th and 84.13-th per-centiles as a summary metric in the former case. We use the Trace to summarize the latter case: the propor-tion of normalized event counts falling along the leading diagonal of the matrix. This represents simply the pro-portion of events reconstructed in the correct bin, with a higher value indicating a more diagonal migration ma-trix. Per convention, migration matrices are normalized row-by-row, and as such the trace is normalized to unity by dividing by the number of rows. In the event-by-event comparison of high-level observ-ables, the definition of “truth” varies. In the t¯t and t¯tW 

studies, we compare to a partonic truth definition: the top-quark or W boson kinematics as recorded in sim-ulation immediately prior to their decay, preceding the application of parton showering, hadronization, and sub-sequent detector response modeling. We choose this be-9cause measurements in the top-quark sector frequently unfold to an inclusive partonic definition for compari-son to fixed-order perturbative QCD predictions. In the electroweak studies, we use the idealized reconstruction definition as a proxy for a stable, “particle-level” fiducial phase-space. This is valid as the observables in question are built exclusively from charged leptons and neutrinos, and as such do not suffer from large smearing effects aris-ing from the detector response to jets. Bold typeface in tabulated results denotes the best performance for each metric, with columns correspond-ing to individual observables. Neutrino residual distribu-tions and migration matrices are plotted exclusively for the t¯t(2L) process, along with their corresponding tab-ulated summary metrics. For the remaining processes, only the tabulated summaries are provided. Uncertain-ties are computed for RMSEs, traces and effective resolu-tions by bootstrapping 100 times and taking the standard deviation of the results. The computed uncertainties are found to be uniformly smaller than the differences be-tween reconstruction techniques, thus quoted variations in performance between methods are statistically signif-icant. To maintain readability, individual uncertainties are omitted from tables, and the maximum observed un-certainty is quoted in each table caption.   

> V. EVENT RECONSTRUCTION IN DILEPTONIC t¯t

With its characteristic short lifetime and chiral decay mediated by the W boson, the top quark exhibits a rich phenomenology that may be studied with high precision in t¯t production at the LHC. Measurements of differen-tial cross-sections, unfolded into the full partonic phase-space, provide invaluable comparisons for fixed-order cal-culations of t¯t production and for developments in event generation [9, 65]. The spin polarizations of the individ-ual quarks and the correlations between them are probed through precise measurement of angular observables in t¯t

production [2, 66], and offer insight into the presence of quantum entanglement and bound-state effects near the production threshold [67, 68]. Kinematic quantities per-taining to the top quarks and the overall t¯t system set constraints on various supersymmetric (SUSY) scenar-ios [69], extended Higgs models [70] and Standard Model effective field theory (SMEFT) operators [71]. All sce-narios require accurate reconstruction of the top quarks’ kinematics, demonstrating why top quark reconstruc-tion has been an active area of research since the Teva-tron [31].  

> A. Analytical ellipse method

By imposing constraints on the known masses of the top quark and W boson, the system of kinematic equa-tions relating the t¯t system to its final-state decay prod-ucts can be closed and solved analytically. Several non-ML-based techniques have been developed specifically for reconstructing neutrinos in dileptonic t¯t [29–31]. We fo-cus on the Ellipse Method (EM) [72], which has been utilized in several recent ATLAS and CMS t¯t measure-ments [67, 68, 73, 74], and frames the system of equa-tions geometrically. For each top or antitop quark decay chain, the W -boson mass constraint confines the unob-served neutrino momentum to a two-dimensional ellipse within the transverse momentum plane. The intersec-tions of the two ellipses — representing the separate top and antitop decay branches — yield the physically per-missible momentum solutions for the neutrino system. Our implementation 3 of the EM extends the frame-work provided in [72] by incorporating a stochastic sam-pling of the top-quark and W -boson mass distributions. Performing multiple mass samplings per event allows the algorithm to make multiple attempts to find analyti-cal solutions, thereby enhancing the reconstruction ef-ficiency. In events where multiple valid solutions are found, the configuration yielding the lowest invariant mass of the t¯t system (mt¯t) is selected. The top-quark mass is sampled from a Gaussian distribution 

N (172 .50 GeV , 1.48 GeV), while the W -boson mass is drawn from N (80 .38 GeV , 2.085 GeV). Alternative analytical solution procedures utilized in past measurements include the Sonnenschein [29] and NW methods [31], which are described in Appendix D. The Sonnenschein method has been reported to perform worse than the EM [75] and was excluded from all stud-ies, as was the case in the ν2-flows publication [38]. Acustom implementation 4 of the NW method was evalu-ated on our test dataset but dropped from final compar-ison plots due to its inferior reconstruction performance relative to the EM.  

> B. Assignment performance

The assignment task in dileptonic t¯t is simple: asso-ciate a unique b-jet to each charged lepton to define the visible decay products of both parent quarks. We study how SPANet and VyPER perform in this task. The spe-cific procedure for VyPER is given in Appendix A 3. Ta-ble II shows this comparison. The per-top assignment efficiency ε(tlep ) is the ratio of correctly assigned b-jet– lepton pairs to the total number of top quarks, and the event assignment efficiency ε(t¯t) is the ratio of events in which both pairings are correct to the total number of events. The SPANet training setup is discussed in Appendix B. The assignment performance is comparable between both networks.   

> 3https://github.com/els285/VyPERpaper
> 4https://github.com/tzuhanchang/TensorNW

10 100 0 100 100 0 100 500 250 0 250 500 0 2 4

∆px [GeV] ∆py [GeV] ∆pz [GeV] ∆R

EM ( ∆R) EM (VyPER) ν2-flows VyPER 

FIG. 4. Binned distributions between the truth neutrino and predicted neutrino Cartesian momentum ( px, py , pz ), as well as their angular separation ∆ R, are shown in the upper plot. The lower box plots define the spread around the median (central line) for px, py , and pz using the ±1σ and ±2σ quantiles (corresponding to the 15.87th–84.13th and 2.28th–97.72th percentiles, respectively). The strictly positive ∆ R distribution is summarized using a one-sided box plot, with intervals corresponding to 68 .3% and 95 .4% containment to represent 1 σ and 2 σ coverage. TABLE II. The assignment efficiencies, ε = Ncorrect /N total ,for the individual leptonic top quark, tlep , and the correct pair, t¯t, for VyPER and SPANet. The absolute uncertainty on ε (%)  

> tlep

is 0.05% and 0.07% for ε (%)  

> t¯t

, for both methods. Model ε (%)  

> tlep

ε (%) 

> t¯t

VyPER 85.0 83.8 

SPANet 84.7 83.4 

C. Neutrino reconstruction 

The VyPER, ν2-flows and EM approaches are used to predict the neutrino kinematics. While the machine learning (ML) methods utilize all measured event kine-matics as inputs, the EM relies on predetermined b-jet and lepton assignments. To evaluate its performance, the EM is tested in two configurations. The first utilizes assignments directly provided by the VyPER assignment head, and is referred to as “EM(VyPER)”. The second employs a legacy geometric approach mimicking historic ATLAS and CMS implementations without ML inputs; this configuration selects the two highest-pT b-tagged jets in the event and uses ∆ R matching to assign the b-jet closer to the positively charged lepton to the top quark decay. It is referred to as “EM(∆ R)”. The ν2-flows im-plementation and hyperparameters are discussed in Ap-pendix B. A major limitation of the analytical EM method is its inability to yield physically valid solutions for a non-negligible fraction of events. Table III presents the re-

TABLE III. The fraction of events for which the Ellipse Method provides real solutions, for cases where a ∆ R as-signment of b-jet and lepton is given as input, and where this assignment is taken from VyPER. The effect of repeated sampling of the W boson and top quark mass distributions per event is also shown. The uncertainty on the efficiency from the ∆ R approach is 0.07%, and 0.05% for the VyPER approach. Mass sampling EM(∆ R) [%] EM(VyPER) [%] 1 83 .9 92.1 

20 87 .0 95.0 

construction efficiency of the EM solver when the b-jet– lepton pairings are determined via legacy ∆ R geomet-ric matching versus the machine-learning-driven VyPER assignment head. A significant recovery in efficiency is achieved when utilizing the VyPER assignment, demon-strating substantial performance gains realized by aug-menting traditional analytical solvers with a machine-learning-based assignment. The performance gains real-ized from sampling the top quark and W boson masses 20 times are quantified in the second row of Table III. Figure 4 presents the neutrino kinematic residuals — defined as the true value less the predicted — for px,

py , pz , alongside the angular separation between the true and reconstructed neutrinos. We use the results obtained from the 20-fold mass smearing for both EM(∆ R) and EM(VyPER) methods, and events that fail to yield a so-lution are excluded from that method’s residuals. Con-versely, VyPER and ν2-flows use the full dataset. All his-11 012345

> Normalized counts

×10 3

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.4 0.5 0.6 300 450 600 750 900 1050 

mt¯t

0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4 

> Pred. / Ideal

[GeV] 

2 1 0 1 2

|yt| − | y¯t|

0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 

cos θ +

k

0.8 1.0 1.2 

Ideal reco VyPER 

ν2-flows EM(VyPER) EM( ∆R)

FIG. 5. Distributions of observables in t¯t(2 L) production reconstructed using VyPER, ν2-flows with VyPER assignment, EM with VyPER assignment, and EM with a historic ∆ R assignment. Each prediction is compared to the idealized reconstruction target. Distributions are normalized to unit integral to account for differences in the number of events, as EM(VyPER) and EM(∆ R) contain only a subset of events that have real solutions. Shaded bands indicate statistical uncertainty in each bin. 300 380 440 500 750 2000 

Predicted mt¯t [GeV]            

> 300 380 440 500 750 2000
> Parton truth  mt¯t [GeV]
> 0.68 0.24 0.05 0.36 0.44 0.14 0.06 0.14 0.35 0.33 0.17 0.12 0.21 0.59 0.40 0.55

VyPER 

> 300 380 440 500 750 2000

Predicted mt¯t [GeV]             

> 300 380 440 500 750 2000 0.64 0.26 0.06 0.34 0.44 0.15 0.07 0.13 0.34 0.33 0.19 0.11 0.20 0.60 0.05 0.38 0.58

ν2-flows 

> 300 380 440 500 750 2000

Predicted mt¯t [GeV]             

> 300 380 440 500 750 2000 0.65 0.25 0.06 0.30 0.50 0.12 0.07 0.09 0.36 0.36 0.17 0.10 0.20 0.60 0.07 0.34 0.62

EM (VyPER) 

> 300 380 440 500 750 2000

Predicted mt¯t [GeV]              

> 300 380 440 500 750 2000 0.50 0.27 0.10 0.11 0.25 0.47 0.14 0.12 0.08 0.34 0.36 0.20 0.10 0.19 0.61 0.08 0.34 0.63

EM ( ∆R)

> -1 -0.5 00.5 1

Predicted cos φ         

> -1 -0.5 00.5 1
> Parton truth cos  φ
> 0.69 0.22 0.06 0.17 0.49 0.25 0.08 0.20 0.48 0.28 0.05 0.24 0.70
> -1 -0.5 00.5 1

Predicted cos φ         

> -1 -0.5 00.5 10.69 0.22 0.06 0.18 0.48 0.25 0.09 0.20 0.48 0.29 0.05 0.24 0.70
> -1 -0.5 00.5 1

Predicted cos φ        

> -1 -0.5 00.5 10.68 0.22 0.07 0.15 0.50 0.25 0.09 0.16 0.49 0.31 0.20 0.74
> -1 -0.5 00.5 1

Predicted cos φ        

> -1 -0.5 00.5 10.64 0.23 0.09 0.14 0.47 0.26 0.12 0.16 0.47 0.33 0.19 0.75

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> Probability

FIG. 6. Migration matrices for mt¯t and cos ϕ observables for the four reconstruction approaches in the t¯t(2L) process. The total count of each row is normalized to unity by convention, and the fractional per-row yield is annotated in each bin. Bins with under 5% of the row’s yield are not annotated. The binning for the mt¯t matrices is not equal, with finer binning concentrated around the bulk of the distribution, but presented with equal spacing for readability. 

tograms are normalized such that their integral is unity. In the bottom panels, the box plots illustrate data distri-bution using standard deviation intervals around the me-dian for the Cartesian momenta. The inner boxes capture the ±1σ range (15.87-th to 84.13-th percentiles), while the outer whiskers extend to the ±2σ range (2.28-th to 97.72-th percentiles, containing 95.5% of the data). The ∆R displays the median, and the 1 σ, and 2 σ deviation 12                                   

> TABLE IV. Neutrino reconstruction accuracy in t¯t2L pro-duction. Metrics defined in Section IV D. Momentum metrics are quoted in GeV. The relative uncertainty does not exceed 0.4% on the Res. and does not exceed 0.75% on the RMSE. Uncertainties are larger on EM predictions and highest for the EM(∆ R) method, driven by a reduction in statistics from events failing the reconstruction. ∆R∆px∆py∆pz
> Model Mean Res. RMSE Res. RMSE Res. RMSE EM(∆ R)2.24 70.6 54.4 70.3 54.6 170 170 EM(VyPER) 2.20 64.3 46.2 63.9 46.1 158 149
> ν2-flows 2.19 66.3 40.9 66.1 40.6 156 133 VyPER 2.20 64.1 39.8 66.0 40.6 155 127

from zero. The ML techniques exhibit slightly narrower distributions for the momentum components. The devi-ation from zero for the neutrino’s pz momentum is much larger than its transverse components because the MET provides no longitudinal constraints. The effective reso-lution (Res.) and the RMSE for each distribution and technique are also tabulated in Table IV. Relative uncer-tainties do not exceed 0.4% on the Res. metric, do not exceed 0.75% on the RMSE, and do not exceed 0.25% for the ∆ R mean. The EM(∆ R) method has the largest uncertainties, driven by a higher fraction of events failing reconstruction.  

> D. High-level observables

Each neutrino is paired with a charged lepton, and the edge assignment (as outlined in Appendix A 3) determine the b-jet associated to the lepton pair. This defines a triad of final-state objects corresponding to three decay products of each top quark. The sum of their respective four-momenta yields the kinematics of each parent quark, which are combined to reconstruct the t¯t system. Given the similarity between the VyPER and SPANet assign-ment efficiencies, we focus henceforth exclusively on the VyPER model, omitting the SPANet results for brevity. We assess the performance of each reconstruction method by examining several observables of interest to measurements in dileptonic t¯t production. Figure 5shows three such observables: the invariant mass of the system, mt¯t; the difference in absolute rapidity between the quarks, |yt| − | y¯t|, used to measure asymmetries in production; and the angular variable cos( θ+ 

> k

), sensitive to spin polarization and defined in Appendix E. An event from either EM implementation with a non-physical so-lution is omitted as before, and the histograms are nor-malized to unit area. The ML-based techniques are seen to preserve the shape of the idealized reconstruction dis-tribution better than the EM approach. We evaluate the event-by-event fidelity of each recon-struction technique relative to the partonic truth. Fig-ure 6 show binned migration matrices for the mt¯t and cos ϕ variables, with the latter defined in Appendix C. While similar performance emerges across the recon-struction techniques for both observables, the exact frac-tion of events correctly retained on the main diagonal varies across the phase space. Table V summarizes the global performance characteristics, presented for the mt¯t,

|yt| − | y¯t|, cos θ+ 

> k

, and cos ϕ observables. Across three of the four observables, the EM approach with VyPER assignment yields the highest diagonal purity and the sharpest resolution. Furthermore, VyPER marginally outperforms ν2-flows in seven of the eight evaluated met-rics, while the EM framework utilizing ∆ R assignment consistently under-performs relative to the alternative techniques.  

> E. Discussion

When evaluating performance based on similarity to parton-level truth, fully ML-driven predictions outper-form historic implementations of the EM method, imply-ing that the precision of existing t¯t measurements could be enhanced through their adoption, particularly those that unfold to parton-level. However, when studying the event-by-event comparison of high-level observables, the EM approach using VyPER-derived object assignments emerges as the optimal reconstruction strategy. We hy-pothesize that incorporating exact, on-shell mass con-straints provides the EM with physical inductive bias that regularizes the reconstructed distributions. This finding demonstrates that analytically solving kinematic constraint equations remains a powerful approach pro-vided the underlying combinatorial ambiguities — such as the pairing of b-jets to leptons — can be resolved with high accuracy in advance. While comparisons utilizing top quarks defined within a fiducial particle-level phase space may yield a different performance ranking, such studies are left to future work.            

> VI. EVENT RECONSTRUCTION IN THE ELECTROWEAK SECTOR: H→W±W∓∗ AND VBS W±W±PRODUCTION

The precise study and characterization of the SM elec-troweak sector is one of the primary objectives of the LHC [76]. Processes like vector-boson fusion (VBF) Higgs production [77] and vector boson scattering [78] represent the frontier of our understanding of the mech-anism of electroweak symmetry breaking, providing in-sight into the structure of the electroweak vacuum and the unitarization of scattering amplitudes via the Higgs mechanism at high energies [5]. Higgs boson production through VBF with a subse-quent decay into a pair of W bosons is a direct probe of the Higgs–vector-boson interaction [79, 80], and event reconstruction will help constrain the CP properties of the coupling and map the spin structure of the Higgs 13                                                  

> TABLE V. Event-by-event reconstruction accuracy metrics for four high-level observables in t¯t(2L) production. For each observable, the row-normalized trace diagonal ratio and the effective resolution (Res.) central values are provided. The Res. of mt¯tis quoted in units of GeV. The maximum uncertainty on any metric does not exceed 0.5%. Technique mt¯t|yt| − | y¯t|cos θ+
> Kcos ϕ
> Trace Res. Trace Res. Trace Res. Trace Res. VyPER 0.520 136 0.619 0.812 0.579 0.635 0.593 0.619
> ν2-flows 0.518 141 0.626 0.817 0.576 0.642 0.588 0.627 EM (VyPER) 0.549 128 0.593 0.824 0.590 0.609 0.605 0.593
> EM (∆ R)0.513 150 0.577 0.891 0.562 0.673 0.583 0.640

boson [4, 81]. Measurements of this process could also leverage event reconstruction to improve the precision of Simplified Template Cross-Section (STXS) measure-ments [82], set limits on SMEFT operators and anoma-lous couplings [83, 84], and even observe quantum entan-glement in the electroweak sector [7]. Vector-boson scattering is directly sensitive to the polarization structure of the scattering bosons, which drives the delicate interference between gauge and Higgs-mediated amplitudes. Among all electroweak vector-boson scattering processes, the same-sign W ±W ± chan-nel provides the cleanest experimental environment, making it the premier candidate for the study of boson polarization [85], where event reconstruction will help extract these polarization fractions [3, 86]. Measure-ments of this process could also leverage these recon-structed kinematics to set new limits on anomalous quar-tic gauge couplings (aQGC) and dimension-eight SMEFT operators [87, 88] and extend sensitivity to resonant and non-resonant new physics in the diboson invariant-mass tail [89]. Targeting these processes in leptonic channels provides clean experimental triggers and exceptional control over backgrounds, at the expense of a kinematically under-constrained final-state that has hampered the measure-ment of Higgs and electroweak boson properties. Lep-tonic channels thus benefit most from full event recon-struction: for both processes, we focus on the dileptonic channel where both W bosons decay to a lepton-neutrino pair, of opposite electric charge in the H → W W ∗ pro-cess and of identical electric charge in the VBS W W 

process. We evaluate the performance of the VyPER and ν2-flows generative architectures to predict the kine-matics of the neutrino paired with each charged lepton.  

> A. Neutrino kinematics

The comparisons of predicted neutrino kinematics to truth neutrino kinematics are given in Tables VI and VII for the H → W W ∗ and VBS W W processes, respec-tively. The H → W W ∗ results show commensurate per-formance between both reconstruction techniques, while VyPER is seen to deliver more accurate neutrino kine-matics in the VBS W W process.                                                        

> TABLE VI. Neutrino reconstruction accuracy for the H→
> W W ∗process. Metrics defined in Section IV D. Momentum metrics are quoted in GeV. The relative uncertainty on any one metric does not exceed 0.3%. ∆R∆px∆py∆pz
> Model Mean Res. RMSE Res. RMSE Res. RMSE VyPER 1.48 39.7 24.0 39.7 24.1 111 95.4
> ν2-flows 1.48 39.7 24.1 39.6 24.1 113 99.0 TABLE VII. Neutrino reconstruction accuracy for the VBS
> W W process. Metrics defined in Section IV D. Momentum metrics are quoted in GeV. The relative uncertainty on any one metric does not exceed 0.5%. ∆R∆px∆py∆pz
> Model Mean Res. RMSE Res. RMSE Res. RMSE VyPER 1.55 82.0 57.6 80.9 56.7 214 193
> ν2-flows 1.70 93.6 67.5 93.9 67.5 246 229
> B. High-level observables

Each neutrino is explicitly paired with a charged lep-ton prior to generating the neutrino kinematics. The 

W bosons are then reconstructed by summing the four-momenta of the pair. For the H → W W ∗ channel, the four-momenta of the two W bosons are further summed to reconstruct the Higgs boson. In the idealized base-line, the true neutrino kinematics are used instead of the model predictions. For each process, we select an individual set of observ-ables constructed from the reconstructed W boson kine-matics; these are chosen either to evaluate reconstruc-tion performance or because they represent observables relevant for downstream physics measurements. Fig-ure 7 shows such high-level observables for H → W W ∗

and demonstrates that VyPER recovers the double-peak structure of W boson invariant mass distribution, mW

(corresponding to the on-shell and off-shell W bosons) better than ν2-flows, and similarly more closely matches the idealized shape of the Higgs boson invariant mass, 

mH . Figure 7 also shows the cosine of the W + helicity angle in the Higgs boson reference frame (defined in Ap-14 pendix E), where reconstruction performance is found to be similar with higher deviations towards positive unity. Table VIII quotes the event-by-event similarity metrics for mH and cos θ+ 

> K

, with mW replaced by the transverse momentum of the Higgs boson, pHT . We observe that VyPER reconstruction marginally out-performs ν2-flows.                                

> TABLE VIII. Event-by-event similarity metrics for H→
> W W ∗production. Resolution (Res.) of mHand pH
> Tare quoted in GeV. All relative uncertainties on the trace fall below 0.2% and all relative uncertainties on the Res. fall be-low 0.3%.
> mHpH
> Tcos θ+
> K
> Models Trace Res. Trace Res. Trace Res. VyPER 0.270 2.22 0.675 29.0 0.423 0.992
> ν2-flows 0.266 2.91 0.668 30.1 0.419 1.00

VyPER’s superior neutrino reconstruction accuracy in VBS W W translates into superior replication of the ide-alized reconstructed distribution shapes in Figure 8. This figure evaluates the W boson mass, mW , as a direct benchmark for the resolution of the reconstruction tech-nique. It also shows the leading W boson transverse mo-mentum, W leading  

> pT

, and the rapidity difference between the bosons, which serve as key observables for study-ing electroweak symmetry breaking: W leading  

> pT

probes the high-energy tail sensitive to aQGCs, while the rapidity separation isolates the characteristic scattering topology of the VBS process. Table IX summarizes the event-by-event similarity between the predictions and the idealized reconstruction. Here, the invariant mass of the diboson system, mW W , is evaluated instead of the individual W

boson mass, as mW W is thought to be a more relevant observable for physics interpretations and cross-section measurements. VyPER realises a superior event recon-struction across all metrics.                                    

> TABLE IX. Event-by-event similarity metrics for VBS W W
> production. Metrics defined in Section IV D. Resolution (Res.) of mW W and Wleading
> pT are quoted in GeV. All relative uncertainties on the trace fall below 0.25% and all relative uncertainties on the Res. fall below 0.5%.
> mW W Wleading
> pT ∆y(W, W )Model Trace Res. Trace Res. Trace Res. VyPER 0.420 180 0.552 81.8 0.630 1.47
> ν2-flows 0.412 186 0.517 90.0 0.544 1.76
> C. Discussion

We show that generative techniques accurately model neutrino kinematics in electroweak processes. This en-ables the high-fidelity reconstruction of high-level W bo-son and Higgs boson observables, including both kine-matic and angular distributions essential for probing bo-son couplings and polarizations. In particular, VyPER demonstrates a superior ability to reproduce recon-structed mass spectra in both H → W W ∗ and VBS W W 

processes, and yields greater similarity to truth on an event-by-event basis for all studied observables. The ap-plication of these techniques establishes a new paradigm in multi-lepton electroweak measurements: one where high-level observables are fully reconstructed and used to probe the electroweak sector with greater scrutiny.    

> VII. EVENT RECONSTRUCTION IN t¯tW ±
> PRODUCTION

The production of top-antitop quark pairs in associ-ation with a W boson offers invaluable insight into the couplings between electroweak bosons and the top quark sector. This rare scattering process has been measured inclusively and differentially at the LHC [90–93], consti-tutes a key background in the measurements of other rare processes including t¯tH production [94], and is an impor-tant component of global SMEFT fits in the top quark sector [95–97]. Event reconstruction in this process would enable unfolding to the parton level, potentially shed-ding light on the origin of the persistent discrepancies between measured inclusive rates and the most precise fixed-order predictions [98, 99]. Furthermore, a broader suite of properties can be explored: full reconstruction fa-cilitates the measurement of partonic charge asymmetries as well as variables sensitive to the polarization of the W

boson itself [93, 100]. With its complex and diverse fi-nal state, t¯tW ± production serves as a rich playground for benchmarking event reconstruction techniques, and allows us to showcase VyPER’s edge reconstruction, hy-peredge reconstruction and neutrino prediction capabili-ties in a single topology. We study the two-lepton final state where both leptons have the same electric charge: the associated prompt W boson must always decay lep-tonically, with one top quark also decaying leptonically and the other hadronically.  

> A. Assignment

The assignment task looks to assign three jets to the hadronic top, and to pair a lepton with a jet to define the leptonic top. The lepton not paired is then iden-tified as coming from the associated W boson decay. VyPER and SPANet are trained to perform this assign-ment. The assignment procedure for VyPER is detailed in Appendix. A 3. SPANet is observed to produce the unphysical combination of two leptons assigned to the same top quark in a small number of cases: these events are discarded from all comparisons for all networks. The performance of both networks is tabulated in Table. X, 15 10 3        

> 10 2
> 10 1
> Normalized counts
> 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 20 30 40 50 60 70 80

mW      

> 1.0 1.5 2.0
> Pred. / Ideal
> [GeV]
> 122 123 124 125 126 127 128

mH    

> 12
> [GeV]
> 1.0 0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0

cos θ +  

> k
> 0.95 1.00 1.05
> Ideal reco VyPER ν2-flows

FIG. 7. Kinematic distributions of high-level observables in H → W W ∗ production. The W bosons are reconstructed by combining each lepton’s four-momentum with either the true neutrino kinematics (for the “Ideal reco” baseline) or the model predictions from VyPER and ν2-flows. The Higgs boson four-momentum is given by the sum of the two W bosons’ four-momenta. Shaded bands illustrate the statistical uncertainty in each bin. 10 3          

> 10 2
> 10 1
> Normalized counts
> 02468×10 3
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 65 70 75 80 85 90 95

mW     

> 24
> Pred. / Ideal
> [GeV]
> 50 100 150 200 250 300

W leading       

> pT
> 0.8 1.0
> [GeV]
> 3210123

∆y(W, W )  

> 0.75 1.00 1.25
> Ideal reco VyPER ν2-flows

FIG. 8. Kinematic distributions of high-level observables in VBS W W production. The W bosons are reconstructed by combining each lepton’s four-momentum with either the true neutrino kinematics (for the “Ideal reco” baseline) or the model predictions from VyPER and ν2-flows. Shaded bands indicate the statistical uncertainty in each bin. 

where it is evident that VyPER achieves a higher recon-struction efficiency for all components of the system. 

B. Neutrino reconstruction 

Table XI presents the neutrino reconstruction accu-racy, where we observe that VyPER outperforms ν2-flows in all metrics. 

C. High-level observables 

Prior to kinematic reconstruction, neutrinos are paired with charged leptons. Following the strategy outlined in Appendix A 3, VyPER assigns the remaining jets and lepton-neutrino pairs to define the constituents of the hadronic top, leptonic top, and associated W boson. The kinematics of each individual parent particle and of the overall system are then reconstructed analogously to the previous channels. We compare high-level observables constructed using VyPER to those obtained by combin-ing ν2-flows neutrino predictions with either the VyPER 16                                                                   

> TABLE X. Inclusive assignment efficiency of VyPER and SPANet in 2LSS t¯tW events for the Wboson from the hadronic top quark ( εWhad ), the hadronic top quark ( εthad ), the leptonic top quark ( εtlep ), and the associated Wboson (εWassoc ). The event efficiency εt¯tW requires all four objects to be correctly reconstructed simultaneously. All values are reported in percentages (%). The absolute uncertainty on any one value does not exceed 0.1%. Model εWhad [%] εthad [%] εtlep [%] εWassoc [%] εt¯tW [%] VyPER 89 .783 .573 .680 .468 .8
> SPANet 86.4 80.3 70.1 78.2 64.6 TABLE XI. Neutrino reconstruction accuracy for the same-sign t¯tW process. Metrics defined in Section IV D. Momen-tum metrics are quoted in units of GeV. The relative uncer-tainty on any metric does not exceed 0.35%. ∆R∆px∆py∆pz
> Model Mean Res. RMSE Res. RMSE Res. RMSE VyPER 1.46 75.7 48.6 75.0 48.5 188 174
> ν2-flows 1.59 87.1 54.7 87.6 54.6 212 198

or SPANet assignment configurations. Distributions of the overall invariant mass of the sys-tem mt¯tW , the mass of the associated W boson mW assoc ,and the difference in absolute rapidity between the top and antitop quarks, |yt| − | y¯t|, are shown in Figure 9. The distributions built using VyPER assignment show greater similarity to the idealized reconstruction, and the associated W boson mass is only captured with high fi-delity using the VyPER-predicted neutrinos. Differences in |yt| − | y¯t|, the critical observable for charge asymmetry measurements, are less pronounced. In Table XII, the comparison of each prediction to the partonic truth is summarized for four observables: mt¯tW 

and |yt| − | y¯t|, as well as the transverse momentum of the associated W boson pWT , and cos θ∗, the scattering angle of the top quark in the t¯tW center-of-mass frame, defined in Appendix E. VyPER exhibits the largest trace and smallest Res. for all four observables.  

> D. Discussion

Reconstructing the complete t¯tW final state requires a combination of neutrino kinematic prediction and com-binatorial particle assignments. VyPER integrates these distinct challenges into a single, unified learning objec-tive, outperforming SPANet in all assignment metrics and ν2-flows in neutrino prediction accuracy. This ap-proach yields superior modeling of idealized reconstruc-tion distributions of high-level kinematic and angular ob-servables, alongside tighter resolution relative to parton-level observables. This illustrates how event reconstruc-tion can be successfully applied to high-multiplicity pro-cesses with more than two parent particles, presenting new opportunities to probe SM properties in multi-top-quark and rare Higgs boson production, or search for new physics in heavy supersymmetric decay cascades.  

> VIII. CONCLUSIONS

Event reconstruction remains a critical task in the analysis of particle collider data, invaluable for produc-ing unfolded top quark kinematic spectra and precisely measuring electroweak boson properties. We factorized event reconstruction into the separate tasks of assigning measured jets and charged leptons to parent particles, and predicting unmeasured neutrino kinematics, remark-ing that existing reconstruction tools generally solve only one of these problems. VyPER was presented as a frame-work designed to solve both tasks simultaneously, provid-ing comprehensive event reconstruction for arbitrary SM physics processes. The performance of several event reconstruction tools were compared to VyPER in four different physics pro-cesses. In dileptonic t¯t production, utilizing VyPER-derived b-jet–lepton pairings as input for the analytical Ellipse Method yielded the highest resolution between the reconstructed and parton-level observables, demon-strating that a hybrid machine-learning and analytical framework offers a powerful avenue for future t¯t measure-ments. In electroweak H → W W ∗ and VBS W W scat-tering processes, generative machine learning techniques successfully captured the correlations between measured final states and neutrino kinematics, enabling the accu-rate reconstruction of these inherently under-constrained bosonic systems, opening new avenues for measuring spe-cific boson properties in multi-lepton channels. In t¯tW 

production, VyPER paired superior assignment efficiency with accurate neutrino predictions to reconstruct observ-ables with high resolution. Reconstruction techniques that can perform accurate assignment and neutrino pre-diction will pave the way for precision measurements of top-quark properties in these rare production modes us-ing the expanded LHC Run 3 datasets. Beyond introducing the VyPER framework, this work demonstrates that unifying efficient assignment with pre-cise neutrino kinematic prediction enables the accurate recovery of short-lived parent particles in arbitrary final states with a single tool. Ultimately, individual analyses are advised to evaluate the performance of reconstruction techniques based on their specific downstream sensitivity and final measurement goals. We anticipate full event re-construction having utility in channels beyond those ex-plored here, and await published experimental measure-ments which make use of comprehensive reconstruction models like VyPER. The challenge of event reconstruc-tion will continue to drive novel ML reconstruction de-velopment, which in turn will help deliver a more precise scrutiny of the SM than ever before using data collected 17 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0          

> Normalized counts
> ×10 3
> 10 2
> 10 1
> 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600

mt¯tW       

> 0.9 1.0 1.1
> Pred. / Ideal
> [GeV]
> 72 75 78 81 84 87 90

mW assoc     

> 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
> [GeV]
> 21012

|yt| − | y¯t|

> 0.8 0.9 1.0 1.1
> Ideal reco VyPER
> ν2-flows + VyPER
> ν2-flows + SPANet

FIG. 9. Kinematic distributions of high-level observables in t¯tW production. Neutrinos predictions are produced by both VyPER and ν2-flows. Charged lepton-neutrino pairs are assigned along with jets by both VyPER and SPANet to define both top quarks and the associated W boson. The VyPER assignment order is described in Appendix A 3. TABLE XII. Reconstruction performance metrics comparison for the t¯tW process across different observables and techniques. The combination used for neutrino prediction and assignment are given in the first two columns respectively. The mt¯tW and 

pWT variables are in units of GeV. The relative uncertainty on the trace does not exceed 0.25% and the relative uncertainty on the Res. does not exceed 0.35%.                                          

> Technique mt¯tW pWT|yt| − | y¯t|cos θ∗
> Neutrino Reco. Assignment Trace Res. Trace Res. Trace Res. Trace Res. VyPER VyPER 0.672 105 0.622 43.5 0.717 0.300 0.660 0.221
> ν2-flows VyPER 0.650 114 0.590 48 .00.702 0.326 0.646 0.239
> ν2-flows SPANet 0.601 142 0.586 48 .70.619 0.440 0.609 0.281

at the High-Luminosity LHC. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Y.P. and E.S. are supported by UK Research and Inno-vation [grant number EP/Z533865/1]. The project was selected by the ERC, and funded by UKRI. 

Appendix A: Additional information on VyPER 

VyPER is an open source Python project created with the Pytorch [101] and Pytorch-Geometric [102] libraries. Its training and inference frameworks are built using Pytorch-Lightning [103]. The code is freely available on GitHub 5.In this appendix, we describe the network inputs and hyperparameters used in the presented studies, as well  

> 5https://github.com/tzuhanchang/VyPER

as the assignment strategy used to reconstruct candi-dates from the edge and hyperedge probabilities given by VyPER. 

1. Network input 

The initial state of the graph, that is, at message-passing step s = 0, is defined by the kinematics of the final-state objects, their pairwise relations, and global event information: 

x(0)  

> i

= ( pT i , η i, ϕ i, E i, Q i, b -tag i, ID) , (A1) 

e(0)  

> ij

= (∆ ηij , ∆ϕij , ∆Rij , M ij , k T,ij , z ij ), (A2) 

u(0) = ( Njets , N b-tagged , N e, N μ, E miss  

> T

,ϕEmiss  

> T

, cos ϕEmiss  

> T

, sin ϕEmiss  

> T

), (A3) where i, j ∈ Vexp represents the i-th and j-th final state. The node inputs listed in Eq. A1 pertain to the trans-verse momentum, pseudorapidity, azimuth angle, energy, charge, b-tagging status, and type of the object, respec-tively. Charge and b-tagging status is not applicable to 18 all final-state objects: for jets, we set Q = 0, and for leptons, we set b-tag = 0. For object type, ID = 0 is used for jets; 1 and 2 are used for electrons and muons, respectively. The relations between each ij final-state pair are com-puted and used as edge inputs. The features com-prise their angular separation (∆ ηij , ∆ ϕij , and ∆ Rij ), their combined invariant mass ( Mij ), as well as kT,ij =min( pT,i , p T,j )∆ R and zij = min( pT,i , p T,j )/(pT,i + pT,j ). The global input includes the multiplicity of jets, b-tagged jets, electrons and muons, as well the missing transverse momentum and its azimuth direction, along with its cosine and sine, as listed in Eq. A3.  

> 2. Network configurations

A set of hyperparameters used in our studies is shown in Table XIII. In the t¯t experiment, both edge classifi-cation and neutrino diffusion components are enabled, yielding a model size of 3.6 million trainable parame-ters, whereas the two neutrino reconstruction-only tests (H → W W ∗ and VBS same-sign W W ) use a smaller model of 3.2 million parameters. With all three compo-nents active, the model used for the t¯tW reconstruction has a 5 million trainable parameters.                                                                       

> TABLE XIII. A list of hyperparameters used to setup VyPER for the presented study. Name Expression Variable Value 1Number of MPNN steps s= 1 , . . . , S S32Message dimensionality x(s)
> i,e(s)
> ij ,u(s)∈RDD128 3Hyperedge dimensionality vm∈RLL128 4Context dimensionality x∗
> k,Tθ(t)∈RWW128 5Number of diffusion steps t= 1 , . . . , T T200 6Number of DiT modules ——47Number of attention heads ——88Hyperedge loss scale αα0.5 9Diffusion loss scale ηη0.8 a
> 10 Learning rate ——0.00025 11 Dropout ——0.001 12 Batch size ——4096
> aSet to 0.6 for the dileptonic t¯tstudy.

The learning rate follows a schedule based on the recorded validation loss: it is reduced by a factor of 0.8 whenever the validation loss has not improved for 10 epochs. An early stopping mechanism is employed to ter-minate the training after 50 non-improving epochs. Only the network state that produces the lowest validation loss is saved. All experiments were run on an NVIDIA DGX Spark GB10 (128GB) with CUDA 13.0.  

> 3. Assignment strategy

VyPER outputs a score for each edge and hyperedge, representing the probability that the given structure con-tains the correct final-state products of a parent particle decay. These probabilities are used to determine the final assignment with channel-specific selection criteria. For t¯t (2L), we choose the two highest-scoring edges, each of which must have exactly one lepton as an end-point and share no common nodes. For t¯tW (2LSS), VyPER predicts two scores for each edge, corresponding to the leptonic-top edge class (con-necting the b-jet and lepton from the leptonic top) and the hadronic-W class (connecting the two jets from the hadronic W boson). All 3-node hyperedges are simulta-neously classified to give a probability that they consti-tute the three jets from the hadronic top. We prioritize the reconstruction of the leptonic top quark, choosing whichever edge has the highest leptonic-top class score. We then compute a total hadronic-top score by sum-ming the three individual hadronic-W scores within each triplet of jets, and adding the corresponding hyperedge score. Based on this combined score, we select the high-est scoring candidate that shares no nodes with the pre-selected leptonic top quark edge. 

> Appendix B: Implementation of SPANet and
> ν2-flows

In the presented studies, VyPER is benchmarked against two ML techniques: SPANet [16–18] and ν2-flows [38], whose training setups are described in this section. We use the latest SPANet release, v2.3 (avail-able at 6), configured using the setup recommended by its authors for all-hadronic t¯t, adapted for the specific processes considered here. The public version of ν2-flows (available at 7) is em-ployed in our studies. We follow the authors’ recom-mended setup for dileptonic t¯t, with minor adjustments to match our specific processes. ν2-flows outputs a neu-trino and an anti-neutrino, which can be unambiguously assigned to the correct lepton for events with two oppo-sitely charged leptons. For events with a same-sign lep-ton pair, ν2-flows requires a minor modification, in which   

> 6https://github.com/Alexanders101/SPANet/releases/tag/ v2.3
> 7https://github.com/rodem-hep/nu2flows/tree/for_public

19 case each neutrino is implicitly associated to a lepton in the same way as in VyPER. 

> Appendix C: Assignment models in the literature

Supervised ML-based assignment algorithms embed event information into high-dimensional latent spaces through a sequence of learnable transformations, and then utilize specific classification heads to solve the as-signment. The assignment strategy varies by model. The SPANet [16–18] framework optimizes a global categorical cross-entropy loss over all possible final-state combina-tions, forcing all decay configurations to compete simul-taneously. The SAJA [19, 20] model classifies each final-state object individually, minimizing a cross-entropy loss across a set of target parton labels. The HyPER model [21] casts all object combinations as independent hyper-edges and classifies these using cross-entropy loss. The Topograph [22] and TIGER [23] models leverage graph structures to recursively classify binary edges linking ob-served objects to intermediate parent nodes. The 0-lepton t¯t channel has been a focus of model comparison: recent studies have shown that leading reconstruction ef-ficiencies can be achieved with smaller graph-based mod-els compared to larger transformers [21], that dropping candidate parent particles with low reconstruction scores can yield improved reconstruction purities [23]. The lat-est work in this area applies the generative ML paradigm in the discrete case [24] to iteratively solve the assignment problem.   

> Appendix D: Review of alternative t¯t(2L) reconstruction methods 1. Sonnenschein method

The Sonnenschein method casts the constrained kine-matic equations of the t¯t decay system as a pair of quadratics in the neutrino and anti-neutrino longitudinal momentum [29]. The system is reformulated as a quartic polynomial in one component of neutrino momenta and solved through the method of resultants. As stated in Section V A, the Sonnenschein method was not tested as it was found historically to perform worse than the EM.  

> 2. NeutrinoWeighter method

The NeutrinoWeighter (NW) [31] method does not ex-plicitly solve kinematic equations of constraint, instead repeatedly sampling a simulated distribution of neutrino pseudorapidity ην to give an ensemble of solution hy-potheses per event. Each hypothesis is assigned a weight that is Gaussian in the difference between the predicted combined neutrino transverse momentum and the MET, with the highest weighted hypothesis selected as neutrino candidates for that event. A baseline implementation of the NW algorithm is not provided in the literature; further, it is known to be extremely computationally-expensive, particularly when implementing a fine-grained η sampling. To this end, we implement the NW algorithm in PyTORCH for paral-lel execution on graphical processing units (GPUs). This implementation computes neutrino solutions for batches of events with a batch size of 64, in 50 ην steps. The sampling of top quark and W boson masses is identical to the EM case above. Our implementation is available at https://github.com/tzuhanchang/TensorNW. As stated in Section V A, we applied this implemen-tation of the NW method but chose not to present the results as they were inferior to the EM. 

> Appendix E: Construction of angular observables

Angular observables defined in reference frames other than the laboratory frame offer a stern test to reconstruc-tion algorithms, as the combination of Lorentz boosts and vector operations place a heavy demand on attaining ac-curate assignment and neutrino kinematics. In the t¯t and H → W W ∗ studies, the observable cos θ+

> k

is the cosine of the “helicity angle”, defined in the helicity basis with definition given in [2]. In t¯t(2L) the observ-able is constructed by first Lorentz boosting the recon-structed top quarks and the leptons into the t¯t center-of-mass frame, and then further boosting the leptons into their individual parent top quarks’ frames as defined in the t¯t center-of-mass frame. The variable is then given by the scalar product of the positive lepton’s spatial di-rection and the beam line. The H → W W ∗ process is completely analogous given the substitution of the W

bosons for the top quarks. The cos ϕ observable is de-fined as scalar product between the two leptons defined as above in their parent reference frame. This observable is only studied in t¯t(2L). In the t¯tW study, we examine the cosine of the top quark production angle, cos θ∗, which is simply the cosine of the angle between the top quark – as defined in the t¯t

center-of-mass frame – and the beam line. 

> Appendix F: Data and software availability

VyPER code is available on GitHub at https:// github.com/tzuhanchang/VyPER/ . Detailed instruc-tions on how to perform training and inference are pro-vided in the README.md. Training, validation and testing datasets are made available for all four physics processes on Zenodo [64]( https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.22308461 )and HuggingFace (https://huggingface.co/ datasets/tzuhanchang/VyPER ). The records describes 20 the detector-level and generator-level information saved in ROOT format [104]. 

[1] L. Evans and P. Bryant, LHC Machine, JINST 3 (08), S08001. [2] W. Bernreuther, D. Heisler, and Z.-G. Si, A set of top quark spin correlation and polarization observables for the LHC: Standard Model predictions and new physics contributions, JHEP 12 , 026, arXiv:1508.05271 [hep-ph]. [3] A. Ballestrero, E. Maina, and G. Pelliccioli, Differ-ent polarization definitions in same-sign W W scatter-ing at the LHC, Phys. Lett. B 811 , 135856 (2020), arXiv:2007.07133 [hep-ph]. [4] I. Anderson et al. , Constraining Anomalous HVV Inter-actions at Proton and Lepton Colliders, Phys. Rev. D 

89 , 035007 (2014), arXiv:1309.4819 [hep-ph]. [5] B. W. Lee, C. Quigg, and H. B. Thacker, Weak Inter-actions at Very High-Energies: The Role of the Higgs Boson Mass, Phys. Rev. D 16 , 1519 (1977). [6] Y. Afik and J. R. M. de Nova, Entanglement and quan-tum tomography with top quarks at the LHC, Eur. Phys. J. Plus 136 , 907 (2021), arXiv:2003.02280 [quant-ph]. [7] A. J. Barr, Testing Bell inequalities in Higgs bo-son decays, Phys. Lett. B 825 , 136866 (2022), arXiv:2106.01377 [hep-ph]. [8] M. Aaboud et al. (ATLAS), Measurement of top quark pair differential cross-sections in the dilepton channel in 

pp collisions at √s = 7 and 8 TeV with ATLAS, Phys. Rev. D 94 , 092003 (2016), [Addendum: Phys.Rev.D 101, 119901 (2020)], arXiv:1607.07281 [hep-ex]. [9] A. M. Sirunyan et al. (CMS), Measurement of double-differential cross sections for top quark pair production in pp collisions at √s = 8 TeV and impact on parton distribution functions, Eur. Phys. J. C 77 , 459 (2017), arXiv:1703.01630 [hep-ex]. [10] A. M. Sirunyan et al. (CMS), Evidence for associated production of a Higgs boson with a top quark pair in final states with electrons, muons, and hadronically decaying τ leptons at √s = 13 TeV, JHEP 08 , 066, arXiv:1803.05485 [hep-ex]. [11] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Measurement of Higgs boson decay into b-quarks in associated production with a top-quark pair in pp collisions at √s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 06 , 097, arXiv:2111.06712 [hep-ex]. [12] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Calibration of the jet energy scale and resolution of small-radius jets using semilep-tonic t¯t events with the ATLAS detector, Eur. Phys. J. C 86 , 943 (2026), arXiv:2512.17482 [hep-ex]. [13] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), The ATLAS Experiment at the CERN Large Hadron Collider, JINST 3, S08003. [14] S. Chatrchyan et al. (CMS), The CMS Experiment at the CERN LHC, JINST 3, S08004. [15] M. Aaboud et al. (ATLAS), Top-quark mass measure-ment in the all-hadronic tt decay channel at √s =8 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 09 , 118, arXiv:1702.07546 [hep-ex]. [16] A. Shmakov, M. J. Fenton, T.-W. Ho, S.-C. Hsu, D. Whiteson, and P. Baldi, SPANet: Generalized per-mutationless set assignment for particle physics using symmetry preserving attention, SciPost Phys. 12 , 178 (2022), arXiv:2106.03898 [hep-ex]. [17] M. J. Fenton, A. Shmakov, T.-W. Ho, S.-C. Hsu, D. Whiteson, and P. Baldi, Permutationless many-jet event reconstruction with symmetry preserving at-tention networks, Phys. Rev. D 105 , 112008 (2022), arXiv:2010.09206 [hep-ex]. [18] M. J. Fenton, A. Shmakov, H. Okawa, Y. Li, K.-Y. Hsiao, S.-C. Hsu, D. Whiteson, and P. Baldi, Re-construction of unstable heavy particles using deep symmetry-preserving attention networks, Communica-tions Physics 7, 10.1038/s42005-024-01627-4 (2024). [19] J. S. H. Lee, I. Park, I. J. Watson, and S. Yang, Zero-permutation jet-parton assignment using a self-attention network, J. Korean Phys. Soc. 84 , 427 (2024), arXiv:2012.03542 [hep-ex]. [20] J. Heo, W. Jang, J. S. H. Lee, Y. J. Roh, I. J. Wat-son, and S. Yang, Improving the direct determination of —Vts— using deep learning, Phys. Rev. D 112 , 052003 (2025), arXiv:2502.02918 [hep-ph]. [21] C. Birch-Sykes, B. Le, Y. Peters, E. Simpson, and Z. Zhang, Reconstructing short-lived particles using hy-pergraph representation learning, Phys. Rev. D 111 ,032004 (2025), arXiv:2402.10149 [hep-ph]. [22] L. Ehrke, J. A. Raine, K. Zoch, M. Guth, and T. Golling, Topological reconstruction of particle physics processes using graph neural networks, Phys. Rev. D 107 , 116019 (2023), arXiv:2303.13937 [hep-ph]. [23] N. Soybelman, N. Kakati, E. Gross, and F. A. Di Bello, Topology-agnostic, hierarchical graph network for event reconstruction, Phys. Rev. D 113 , 012014 (2026), arXiv:2510.08162 [hep-ex]. [24] A. Hermansen, C. Scheulen, and T. Golling, Pairton: Iterative reconstruction of short-lived particles (2026), arXiv:2608.14278 [hep-ph]. [25] A. Badea and J. Montejo Berlingen, Data-driven and model-agnostic approach to solving combinatorial as-signment problems in searches for new physics, Phys. Rev. D 109 , L011702 (2024), arXiv:2309.05728 [hep-ph]. [26] B. M. Dillon and M. Spannowsky, Theory-informed neu-ral networks for particle physics, Mach. Learn. Sci. Tech. 

7, 025010 (2026), arXiv:2507.13447 [hep-ph]. [27] R. K. Ellis, I. Hinchliffe, M. Soldate, and J. J. van der Bij, Higgs Decay to τ +τ − A Possible Signature of In-termediate Mass Higgs Bosons at High Energy Hadron Colliders, Nucl. Phys. B 297 , 221 (1988). [28] T. Affolder et al. (CDF), Search for single-top-quark production in p¯p collisions at √s = 1 .8 TeV, Phys. Rev. D 65 , 091102 (2002), arXiv:hep-ex/0110067. [29] L. Sonnenschein, Algebraic Approach to Solve t¯t Dilep-ton Equations, Phys. Rev. D 72 , 095020 (2005), arXiv:hep-ph/0510100. [30] B. A. Betchart, R. Demina, and A. Harel, Analytic solu-tions for neutrino momenta in decay of top quarks, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 736 , 169 (2014), arXiv:1305.1878 [hep-ph]. [31] B. Abbott et al. (D0), Measurement of the Top Quark 21 

Mass in the Dilepton Channel, Phys. Rev. D 60 , 052001 (1999), arXiv:hep-ex/9808029. [32] F. Y. Ahmad, V. Venkataswamy, and G. Fox, Acomprehensive evaluation of generative models in calorimeter shower simulation (2024), arXiv:2406.12898 [physics.ins-det]. [33] B. Hashemi and C. Krause, Deep generative models for detector signature simulation: A taxonomic re-view, Rev. Phys. 12 , 100092 (2024), arXiv:2312.09597 [physics.ins-det]. [34] R. Kansal, A. Li, J. Duarte, N. Chernyavskaya, M. Pierini, B. Orzari, and T. Tomei, Evaluating gener-ative models in high energy physics, Phys. Rev. D 107 ,076017 (2023), arXiv:2211.10295 [hep-ex]. [35] M. Leigh, J. A. Raine, K. Zoch, and T. Golling, ν-flows: Conditional neutrino regression, SciPost Physics 

14 , 10.21468/scipostphys.14.6.159 (2023). [36] D. J. Rezende and S. Mohamed, Variational infer-ence with normalizing flows (2016), arXiv:1505.05770 [stat.ML]. [37] I. Kobyzev, S. J. Prince, and M. A. Brubaker, Normaliz-ing flows: An introduction and review of current meth-ods, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Ma-chine Intelligence 43 , 3964–3979 (2021). [38] J. A. Raine, M. Leigh, K. Zoch, and T. Golling, Fast and improved neutrino reconstruction in multineutrino final states with conditional normalizing flows, Physical Review D 109 , 10.1103/physrevd.109.012005 (2024). [39] Y. Zhang, B.-H. Zhou, Q.-B. Liu, T. A. Wu, S. Li, T. Han, S.-C. Hsu, and M. Low, Entanglement and Bell nonlocality in τ +τ − at the LHC using machine learning for neutrino reconstruction, JHEP 04 , 190, arXiv:2504.01496 [hep-ph]. [40] T.-H. Hsu, B.-H. Zhou, Q. Liu, Y. Xu, S. Li, G. W.-S. Hou, B. Nachman, S.-C. Hsu, V. Mikuni, Y.-T. Chou, and Y. Zhang, Evenet: A foundation model for parti-cle collision data analysis (2026), arXiv:2601.17126 [hep-ex]. [41] S. Qiu, S. Han, X. Ju, B. Nachman, and H. Wang, Holis-tic approach to predicting top quark kinematic proper-ties with the covariant particle transformer, Phys. Rev. D 107 , 114029 (2023), arXiv:2203.05687 [hep-ph]. [42] A. Gevorgyan et al. (CMS), Enhanced reconstruction of dileptonic top quark-antiquark events using supervised machine learning methods , Tech. Rep. (CERN, Geneva, 2025). [43] J. Gilmer, S. S. Schoenholz, P. F. Riley, O. Vinyals, and G. E. Dahl, Neural message passing for quantum chemistry (2017), arXiv:1704.01212 [cs.LG]. [44] P. W. Battaglia, J. B. Hamrick, V. Bapst, et al. , Re-lational inductive biases, deep learning, and graph net-works (2018), arXiv:1806.01261 [cs.LG]. [45] J. Zhou, G. Cui, S. Hu, Z. Zhang, C. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Wang, C. Li, and M. Sun, Graph neural net-works: A review of methods and applications (2021), arXiv:1812.08434 [cs.LG]. [46] A. Sanchez-Gonzalez, N. Heess, J. T. Springenberg, J. Merel, M. Riedmiller, R. Hadsell, and P. Battaglia, Graph networks as learnable physics engines for infer-ence and control (2018), arXiv:1806.01242 [cs.LG]. [47] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. de Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville, Film: Visual reasoning with a general con-ditioning layer (2017), arXiv:1709.07871 [cs.CV]. [48] J. Sohl-Dickstein, E. A. Weiss, N. Maheswaranathan, and S. Ganguli, Deep unsupervised learning using nonequilibrium thermodynamics (2015), arXiv:1503.03585 [cs.LG]. [49] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, Denoising diffusion prob-abilistic models (2020), arXiv:2006.11239 [cs.LG]. [50] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, Denoising diffusion implicit models (2022), arXiv:2010.02502 [cs.LG]. [51] P. Dhariwal and A. Nichol, Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis (2021), arXiv:2105.05233 [cs.LG]. [52] F.-A. Croitoru, V. Hondru, R. T. Ionescu, and M. Shah, Diffusion models in vision: A survey, IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 45 , 10850 (2023). [53] A. Nichol and P. Dhariwal, Improved denoising diffusion probabilistic models (2021), arXiv:2102.09672 [cs.LG]. [54] W. Peebles and S. Xie, Scalable diffusion models with transformers (2023), arXiv:2212.09748 [cs.CV]. [55] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, Adam: A method for stochastic optimization (2017), arXiv:1412.6980 [cs.LG]. [56] J. Alwall, R. Frederix, S. Frixione, V. Hirschi, F. Mal-toni, O. Mattelaer, H. S. Shao, T. Stelzer, P. Torrielli, and M. Zaro, The automated computation of tree-level and next-to-leading order differential cross sections, and their matching to parton shower simulations, JHEP 07 ,079, arXiv:1405.0301 [hep-ph]. [57] R. D. Ball et al. (NNPDF), Parton distributions for the LHC Run II, JHEP 04 , 040, arXiv:1410.8849 [hep-ph]. [58] P. Artoisenet, R. Frederix, O. Mattelaer, and R. Ri-etkerk, Automatic spin-entangled decays of heavy res-onances in Monte Carlo simulations, JHEP 03 , 015, arXiv:1212.3460 [hep-ph]. [59] C. Bierlich et al. , A comprehensive guide to the physics and usage of PYTHIA 8.3 (2022), arXiv:2203.11601 [hep-ph]. [60] J. de Favereau, C. Delaere, P. Demin, A. Giammanco, V. Lemaˆ ıtre, A. Mertens, and M. Selvaggi (DELPHES 3), DELPHES 3, A modular framework for fast simu-lation of a generic collider experiment, JHEP 02 , 057, arXiv:1307.6346 [hep-ex]. [61] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, The anti-kt

jet clustering algorithm, JHEP 04 , 063, arXiv:0802.1189 [hep-ph]. [62] M. Cacciari, G. P. Salam, and G. Soyez, FastJet User Manual, Eur. Phys. J. C 72 , 1896 (2012), arXiv:1111.6097 [hep-ph]. [63] G. Aad et al. , Expected performance of the ATLAS 

b-tagging algorithms in Run-2 , Tech. Rep. (CERN, Geneva, 2015). [64] L. Mao, Y. Peters, E. Simpson, and Z. Zhang, Event reconstruction for multi-lepton final-state processes at the LHC, 10.5281/zenodo.22308461 (2026). [65] S. Catani, S. Devoto, M. Grazzini, S. Kallweit, and J. Mazzitelli, Top-quark pair production at the LHC: Fully differential QCD predictions at NNLO, JHEP 07 ,100, arXiv:1906.06535 [hep-ph]. [66] A. M. Sirunyan et al. (CMS), Measurement of the top quark polarization and t¯ t spin correlations us-ing dilepton final states in proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV, Phys. Rev. D 100 , 072002 (2019), arXiv:1907.03729 [hep-ex]. [67] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Observation of quantum entan-glement with top quarks at the ATLAS detector, Nature 

633 , 542 (2024), arXiv:2311.07288 [hep-ex]. [68] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Observation of a cross-section 22 

enhancement near the t¯t production threshold in √s =13 TeV pp collisions with the ATLAS detector, Rept. Prog. Phys. 89 , 057801 (2026), arXiv:2601.11780 [hep-ex]. [69] A. M. Sirunyan et al. (CMS), Search for top squarks and dark matter particles in opposite-charge dilepton final states at √s = 13 TeV, Phys. Rev. D 97 , 032009 (2018), arXiv:1711.00752 [hep-ex]. [70] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Search for ttbar resonances in final states with exactly one or two leptons using 140 fb −1 of pp collision data at √s = 13 tev with the ATLAS experiment (2025), arXiv:2512.17856 [hep-ex]. [71] J. A. A. Saavedra, C. Degrande, G. Durieux, et al. , In-terpreting top-quark lhc measurements in the standard-model effective field theory (2018), arXiv:1802.07237 [hep-ph]. [72] B. A. Betchart, R. Demina, and A. Harel, Analytic solu-tions for neutrino momenta in decay of top quarks, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A 736 , 169 (2014), arXiv:1305.1878 [hep-ph]. [73] A. M. Sirunyan et al. (CMS), Measurement of the top quark Yukawa coupling from t¯ t kinematic distributions in the lepton+jets final state in proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV, Phys. Rev. D 100 , 072007 (2019), arXiv:1907.01590 [hep-ex]. [74] V. Khachatryan et al. (CMS), Measurement of differ-ential cross sections for top quark pair production us-ing the lepton+jets final state in proton-proton col-lisions at 13 TeV, Phys. Rev. D 95 , 092001 (2017), arXiv:1610.04191 [hep-ex]. [75] E. L. Simpson, A new spin on top-quark physics: us-ing angular distributions to probe top-quark properties, and make the first observation of entanglement between quarks , Ph.D. thesis, Glasgow U. (2024). [76] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), A detailed map of Higgs boson interactions by the ATLAS experiment ten years after the discovery, Nature 607 , 52 (2022), [Erratum: Nature 612, E24 (2022)], arXiv:2207.00092 [hep-ex]. [77] A. M. Sirunyan et al. (CMS), Measurements of Higgs boson production cross sections and couplings in the diphoton decay channel at √s = 13 TeV, JHEP 07 ,027, arXiv:2103.06956 [hep-ex]. [78] R. Covarelli, M. Pellen, and M. Zaro, Vector-Boson scattering at the LHC: Unraveling the electroweak sector, Int. J. Mod. Phys. A 36 , 2130009 (2021), arXiv:2102.10991 [hep-ph]. [79] A. Tumasyan et al. (CMS), Measurements of the Higgs boson production cross section and couplings in the W boson pair decay channel in proton-proton colli-sions at √s = 13 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C 83 , 667 (2023), arXiv:2206.09466 [hep-ex]. [80] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Integrated and differential fidu-cial cross-section measurements for the vector boson fu-sion production of the Higgs boson in the H → W W ∗ →

eνμν decay channel at 13 TeV with the ATLAS detec-tor, Phys. Rev. D 108 , 072003 (2023), arXiv:2304.03053 [hep-ex]. [81] N. Desai, D. K. Ghosh, and B. Mukhopadhyaya, CP-violating HWW couplings at the Large Hadron Collider, Phys. Rev. D 83 , 113004 (2011), arXiv:1104.3327 [hep-ph]. [82] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Measurements of Higgs boson production via gluon–gluon fusion and vector-boson fu-sion using H → W W ∗ → ℓνℓν decays in pp collisions with the ATLAS detector and their effective field the-ory interpretations, Eur. Phys. J. C 85 , 1403 (2025), arXiv:2504.07686 [hep-ex]. [83] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Methodology for EFT interpre-tation of Higgs boson Simplified Template Cross-section results in ATLAS , Tech. Rep. (CERN, Geneva, 2019). [84] A. Hayrapetyan et al. (CMS), Constraints on anoma-lous Higgs boson couplings from its production and decay using the WW channel in proton–proton colli-sions at √s = 13 TeV, Eur. Phys. J. C 84 , 779 (2024), arXiv:2403.00657 [hep-ex]. [85] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Evidence for Longitudinally Polarized W Bosons in the Electroweak Production of Same-Sign W Boson Pairs in Association with Two Jets in pp Collisions at √s=13 TeV with the AT-LAS Detector, Phys. Rev. Lett. 135 , 111802 (2025), arXiv:2503.11317 [hep-ex]. [86] G. Panico, F. Riva, and A. Wulzer, Diboson inter-ference resurrection, Phys. Lett. B 776 , 473 (2018), arXiv:1708.07823 [hep-ph]. [87] C. Degrande and H.-L. Li, Impact of dimension-8 SMEFT operators on diboson productions, JHEP 06 ,149, arXiv:2303.10493 [hep-ph]. [88] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Measurement and interpreta-tion of same-sign W boson pair production in associa-tion with two jets in pp collisions at √s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 04 , 026, arXiv:2312.00420 [hep-ex]. [89] A. Tumasyan et al. (CMS), Search for heavy resonances decaying to WW, WZ, or WH boson pairs in the lepton plus merged jet final state in proton-proton collisions at √s = 13 TeV, Phys. Rev. D 105 , 032008 (2022), arXiv:2109.06055 [hep-ex]. [90] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Measurement of the ttW 

and ttZ production cross sections in pp collisions at √s = 8 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 11 , 172, arXiv:1509.05276 [hep-ex]. [91] V. Khachatryan et al. (CMS), Observation of top quark pairs produced in association with a vector bo-son in pp collisions at √s = 8 TeV, JHEP 01 , 096, arXiv:1510.01131 [hep-ex]. [92] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Measurement of the total and differential cross-sections of ttW production in pp collisions at √s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detec-tor, JHEP 05 , 131, [Erratum: JHEP 11, 127 (2025)], arXiv:2401.05299 [hep-ex]. [93] A. Hayrapetyan et al. (CMS), Measurements of ttW dif-ferential cross sections and the leptonic charge asymme-try at √s = 13 TeV, JHEP 03 , 083, arXiv:2509.13512 [hep-ex]. [94] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Measurement of the Higgs bo-son production in association with top quarks in multi-lepton final states in pp collisions at √s = 13 TeV with the ATLAS detector, JHEP 05 , 183, arXiv:2510.23755 [hep-ex]. [95] R. Goldouzian, J. H. Kim, K. Lannon, A. Mar-tin, K. Mohrman, and A. Wightman, Matching in 

pp → ttW/Z/h + jet SMEFT studies, JHEP 06 , 151, arXiv:2012.06872 [hep-ph]. [96] A. Hayrapetyan et al. (CMS), Search for physics be-yond the standard model in top quark production with additional leptons in the context of effective field theory, JHEP 12 , 068, arXiv:2307.15761 [hep-ex]. [97] G. Aad et al. (ATLAS), Search for electroweak t¯tW j 23 

production in multileptonic final states at √s=13 TeV with the ATLAS detector and bounds on effective field theory operators, Phys. Rev. D 114 , 012001 (2026), arXiv:2509.19038 [hep-ex]. [98] A. Denner and G. Pelliccioli, Combined NLO EW and QCD corrections to off-shell ttW production at the LHC, Eur. Phys. J. C 81 , 354 (2021), arXiv:2102.03246 [hep-ph]. [99] L. Buonocore, S. Devoto, M. Grazzini, S. Kallweit, J. Mazzitelli, L. Rottoli, and C. Savoini, Precise Pre-dictions for the Associated Production of a W Boson with a Top-Antitop Quark Pair at the LHC, Phys. Rev. Lett. 131 , 231901 (2023), arXiv:2306.16311 [hep-ph]. [100] F. Maltoni, M. L. Mangano, I. Tsinikos, and M. Zaro, Top-quark charge asymmetry and polarization in ttW ±

production at the LHC, Phys. Lett. B 736 , 252 (2014), arXiv:1406.3262 [hep-ph]. [101] A. Paszke, S. Gross, F. Massa, et al. , Pytorch: An im-perative style, high-performance deep learning library, in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 32 (Curran Associates, Inc., 2019) pp. 8024–8035. [102] M. Fey and J. E. Lenssen, Fast graph representation learning with PyTorch Geometric, in ICLR Workshop on Representation Learning on Graphs and Manifolds 

(2019). [103] W. Falcon, J. Borovec, A. W¨ alchli, N. Eggert, J. Schock, J. Jordan, N. Skafte, V. Bereznyuk, E. Harris, T. Mur-rell, et al. , Pytorchlightning/pytorch-lightning: 0.7. 6 release, Zenodo (2020). [104] I. Antcheva et al. , ROOT: A C++ framework for petabyte data storage, statistical analysis and visual-ization, Comput. Phys. Commun. 180 , 2499 (2009), arXiv:1508.07749 [physics.data-an].