Title: Exoplanet Detection Using Adaptive Quantum-Optimal Measurement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.06931v1

Published Time: Thu, 09 Jul 2026 00:30:44 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# Exoplanet Detection Using Adaptive Quantum-Optimal Measurement 

Hyunsoo Choi, 1 Hyoung Won Baac, 2, ∗ Zubin Jacob, 3, † and Haejun Chung 1, 4, 5, ‡

> 1

Department of Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, South Korea 

> 2

Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea 

> 3

The Elmore Family School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA 

> 4

Department of Artificial Intelligence Semiconductor Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, South Korea 

> 5

Department of Artificial Intelligence, Hanyang University, Seoul 04763, South Korea 

(Dated: July 9, 2026) Detecting terrestrial exoplanets in the habitable zones of nearby stars remains a critical challenge. Such planets can be 10 8 to 10 10 times fainter than their host stars and lie at diffraction-limited an-gular separations, where starlight strongly obscures the companion signal. Here we present an adaptive quantum measurement method for estimating the number, positions, and brightnesses of mutually incoherent point sources in the sub-Rayleigh, ultra-high-contrast regime, operating at contrasts down to 10 −8—five orders of magnitude beyond previous quantum imaging approaches to exoplanet detection. The method adopts a spatial-mode basis that is updated to maximize the quantum Fisher information per detected photon. Estimation is performed by maximum likelihood in log-brightness coordinates, and the source count is determined by Bayesian-information-criterion (BIC) model selection directly from photon-count statistics, without a tunable detection threshold. For point sources within sub-Rayleigh separations and with brightness ratios spanning eight orders of magnitude, the method reconstructs complete scenes with a mean success rate of 72 .5%. Fur-thermore, it is robust to misalignment, maintaining a 71 .3% success rate under offsets of up to six pixels. These results demonstrate that terrestrial exoplanets can be detected below the Rayleigh limit, a regime previously inaccessible to direct imaging. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

The detection and characterization of exoplanets have become a major challenge in modern astronomy, with implications for planetary formation, atmospheric evo-lution, and the search for potentially habitable environ-ments beyond the Solar System [1–3]. Directly observing a planet is exceptionally challenging, as the planetary signal is much fainter than the stellar emission and is lo-cated at a small angular separation from the host star. As the stellar-to-planet flux ratio increases, the photons associated with the companion are increasingly obscured by the stellar photon flux. Figure 1(b) illustrates this ef-fect: the planetary signal is readily distinguishable when the flux ratio is 10 2, but becomes progressively buried in the stellar photon flux as the ratio approaches 10 6.These observational challenges have motivated the widespread use of indirect detection methods, which in-fer the presence of a planet from its effect on the host star. Radial-velocity spectroscopy enabled the discov-ery of 51 Pegasi b in 1995, the first confirmed planet orbiting a Sun-like star [4]. Transit photometry, imple-mented at survey scale by missions such as Kepler [5] and TESS [6], has since increased the confirmed exo-planet population to more than 6,000 [7]. However, these methods are subject to strong selection effects. Transit    

> ∗hwbaac@skku.edu
> †zjacob@purdue.edu
> ‡haejun@hanyang.ac.kr

detections require the orbital plane to be aligned such that the planet crosses the stellar disk as viewed from Earth, while radial-velocity measurements are most sen-sitive to massive planets on short-period orbits [8]. Con-sequently, small planets at wide separations—including Earth-like planets in long-period orbits around Sun-like stars—remain difficult to detect and characterize with indirect techniques alone. Direct imaging addresses some of the geometric and interpretive limitations of indirect methods by imaging photons from the companion itself, rather than infer-ring its presence from perturbations in the host-star sig-nal [9–11]. Among direct-imaging techniques, coronagra-phy is the most widely adopted strategy for suppressing stellar glare [12]. A coronagraph combines pupil-plane apodization, focal-plane occulting or phase masks, Lyot stops, and wavefront control techniques to effectively at-tenuate the on-axis stellar field while retaining as much off-axis companion light as possible. Such systems have enabled the imaging of substellar companions and cir-cumstellar disks around nearby stars, with demonstrated or projected planet-to-star contrasts reaching the 10 −8

regime [13, 14]. The accessible separation range of coronagraphy is nev-ertheless limited by the inner working angle (IWA), com-monly defined as the smallest angular separation at which a companion can be recovered with sufficient throughput and contrast. Although advanced coronagraph designs can operate at separations approaching the diffraction limit, the companion throughput decreases rapidly be-low the diffraction limit [12]. In this regime, the photons from the companion overlap with the stellar halo and are arXiv:2607.06931v1 [physics.optics] 8 Jul 2026 2          

> FIG. 1. Adaptive quantum measurement framework and exoplanet detection challenge. (a) Schematic of the proposed method. Photons from an unknown multi-source scene are projected by an adaptive mode sorter onto a basis {ϕ1, . . . , ϕ M}maximizing QFI for the current scene estimate and read out as photon counts {n1, . . . , n M}.These counts drive a maximum-likelihood update of the source parameters ( xn, y n, b n), from which the basis is reconstructed to maximize the quantum Fisher information, closing the measure–estimate–adaptive mode calculation loop. (b) Photon-level view of the detection problem as the host– companion contrast deepens from 1:10 2to 1:10 6(10 5photons per panel; red and yellow points denote stellar and planetary photons, crosses mark true positions). The planetary cluster, recognizable at 1:10 2, is progressively buried in the stellar halo and becomes unrecognizable, illustrating the failure of direct imaging in the ultra-high-contrast regime.

also attenuated by the coronagraphic mask, making the planetary signal difficult to recover. Figure 2(b) maps the performance of a simulated vortex coronagraph as a function of host–companion angular separation for a planet-to-star contrast of 10 −8, illustrating the rapid loss of recoverable companion signal at small separations. Terrestrial planets in or near the habitable zones of nearby stars represent some of the most scientifically compelling targets for direct imaging [15, 16], yet remain inaccessible with current methods [17, 18]. Their planet-to-star flux ratios are extremely limited: an Earth–Sun analog has a contrast of order 10 −10 , whereas habitable-zone planets around nearby M dwarfs reach contrasts of approximately 10 −7–10 −8 [19]. At the same time, their projected angular separations are often near or be-low the diffraction limit scale of current telescopes [17]. These targets therefore lie close to the inner working an-gles of conventional coronagraphs, making their detection extremely challenging. The operating ranges of repre-sentative coronagraphic instruments are summarized in Fig. 2(a) [14, 20–24]. The comparison shows that the contrasts required for terrestrial-planet imaging are gen-erally achieved at angular separations larger than those occupied by many habitable-zone terrestrial planets, mo-tivating approaches that can operate efficiently at or be-low the conventional coronagraphic IWA. Quantum-optimal spatial-mode imaging offers a com-plementary route to detecting faint companions at sub-Rayleigh angular separations. Instead of relying solely on starlight suppression, this approach seeks a measure-ment basis that extracts the maximum information avail-able from each detected photon. In this framework, con-ventional image-plane detection corresponds to only one possible measurement and is known to become inefficient 3for detecting sources with small separations as its Fisher information decreases rapidly in the sub-Rayleigh regime. Spatial-mode demultiplexing (SPADE) addresses this limitation by projecting the incoming optical field onto an orthogonal set of spatial modes chosen for the esti-mation or detection task [25]. For two equally bright in-coherent point sources under ideal imaging conditions, SPADE can attain the quantum Cram´ er–Rao bound for separation estimation, thereby avoiding the Rayleigh curse associated with direct imaging [26–28]. These spatial-mode measurements have since been extended in several directions: to sources of unequal or arbitrary relative brightness [29–31], and to more than two inco-herent sources and extended scenes, which SPADE-type measurements estimate at near-quantum-limited preci-sion [32–34]. Since no fixed basis can fully resolve three or more sources [35], adaptive schemes that update the modal basis from preliminary estimates of the scene have been proposed [36–38] and its robustness under realistic imperfections such as noise, crosstalk, and misalignment has been characterized [39–41]. Quantum-optical perspective is particularly relevant to exoplanet detection, where a planet can be modeled as a weak off-axis companion embedded in the optical field of a much brighter on-axis star. In this regime, the cen-tral task is not only to estimate a small angular separa-tion, but also to determine whether a faint companion is present at all. Weak-companion detection has therefore been formulated as a quantum hypothesis-testing prob-lem, for which binary SPADE can approach the quan-tum Chernoff bound and provide a near-optimal mea-surement for discriminating between single-star and star– companion hypotheses [42–45]. This detection-theoretic framework has also motivated exoplanet-oriented mode-sorting coronagraphy, in which stellar leakage is sup-pressed by rejecting the spatial mode predominantly oc-cupied by the on-axis star rather than by occulting a region of the focal plane. A programmable spatial-mode-transformer implementation of this principle demon-strated sub-diffraction localization of an artificial faint companion at a star–planet flux ratio of 1000:1, corre-sponding to a planet-to-star contrast of 10 −3 [23]. Despite this progress, existing demonstrations remain far from the contrast regime required for terrestrial-planet imaging. A planet-to-star contrast of 10 −3 is five orders of magnitude shallower than 10 −8, and even this latter value is optimistic for Earth–Sun analogs in reflected visible light. The current literature has also addressed narrower versions of the full discovery prob-lem. Some studies assume a fixed or known num-ber of incoherent sources [34]; others demonstrate sub-Rayleigh hypothesis testing or separation estimation at moderate source imbalance [44]; and several theoretical treatments impose geometric or statistical priors on the scene [46, 47]. Here, we introduce an adaptive quantum-optimal mea-surement framework for exoplanet detection in the sub-Rayleigh regime without requiring any priors. The method jointly performs source localization and bright-ness estimation, recovers faint companions in simulations at planet-to-star contrasts as low as 10 −8, and determines the number of sources directly from the measurement data using information-criterion-based model selection, rather than assuming a fixed source number. The frame-work also remains robust to registration errors between the source coordinates and the spatial-mode basis imple-mented by the mode sorter.  

> II. METHOD

We develop an adaptive spatial-mode imaging frame-work for detecting faint incoherent companions in the sub-Rayleigh, ultra-high-contrast regime. The approach is motivated by quantum-optimal imaging theory, which shows that direct image-plane detection can lose Fisher information at small angular separations, whereas suit-able spatial-mode projections can recover information that remains available in the optical field [25, 34, 37, 42]. Existing methods often assume a known source num-ber, operate at moderate source imbalance, or rely on fixed measurement bases [48–51]. In contrast, the present method jointly estimates source positions and bright-nesses, adapts the measurement basis using the local quantum Fisher information structure, and infers the number of sources from the data. The pipeline consists of four components. First, the image-plane field is represented by a one-photon density operator for mutually incoherent point sources. Second, photon counts from sequential spatial-mode measure-ments are fit by maximum-likelihood estimation in log-brightness coordinates, which improves numerical condi-tioning over many decades of contrast. Third, the mea-surement basis is updated from the symmetric logarith-mic derivatives of the current density operator estimate, producing an SLD-informed basis for the next iteration. Finally, an over-complete candidate set is pruned using the Bayesian information criterion, allowing the source count to be selected from the accumulated photon statis-tics without an ad-hoc brightness cutoff [52]. These steps enable adaptive recovery of faint companions at planet-to-star contrasts down to 10 −8 in the simulations de-scribed below.  

> A. Imaging model

We model the optical field at the image plane in the single-photon weak-source limit, in which the mean pho-ton number per coherence time is much less than one and successive detection events can be modeled as inde-pendent realizations of a one-photon state [51]. For N

mutually incoherent point sources, the one-photon den-4

FIG. 2. Limitations of coronagraphic suppression in the sub-Rayleigh, ultra-high-contrast regime. (a) Representative operating ranges of existing coronagraphic methods in terms of minimum accessible separation and detectable brightness contrast, includ-ing the Roman CGI [14], the vector vortex coronagraph (VVC) [20], the Keck L′ vortex coronagraph [21], VLT/SPHERE [22], the quantum-optimal coronagraph [23], and the PIAACMC [24]. Conventional coronagraphs achieve ∼ 10 −8 contrast only beyond the Rayleigh limit. (b) Simulated vortex-coronagraph images at a host-to-companion brightness ratio of 1:10 −8. Below the Rayleigh limit, the companion lies within IWA of coronagraph, becoming spatially distinguishable only at separations well beyond the limit. The result illustrates the limited efficacy of coronagraphic rejection for faint-companion detection in the sub-Rayleigh regime. 

sity operator is written as 

ρ(θ) = 

> N

X

> n=1

bn |ϕn⟩⟨ ϕn| , (1) where 

θ = ( x1, y 1, b 1, . . . , x N , y N , b N )⊤

contains the unknown source positions {(xn, y n)}Nn=1 and relative brightnesses {bn}Nn=1 . The brightness parame-ters satisfy bn ≥ 0 and PNn=1 bn = 1, so that bn repre-sents the fraction of detected photons originating from source n. Mutual incoherence eliminates coherent cross terms of the form |ϕn⟩⟨ ϕm| for n̸ = m, leading to the statistical mixture in Eq. (1). The shifted image-plane state |ϕn⟩ is not assumed to be orthogonal to the other source states; in the sub-Rayleigh regime, these states can strongly overlap. Here the single-photon wavefunc-tion takes a Gaussian point spread function (PSF), 

⟨x, y |ϕn⟩ = 1

√2πσ 2 exp 



− (x − xn)2 + ( y − yn)2

4σ2



. (2) 

B. Adaptive iteration 

The adaptive measurement proceeds by alternating be-tween data acquisition, parameter estimation, and ba-sis update. Rather than assuming the true number of sources in advance, the algorithm begins with an over-complete candidate model and later removes un-supported candidates through the model-selection proce-dure described in Sec. II E. At iteration t, the algorithm performs three steps: (i) the incoming field is projected onto the current spatial-mode basis and photon counts are recorded; (ii) the source positions and brightnesses are jointly updated by maximizing the log-likelihood in Eq. (6); and (iii) a new measurement basis is constructed using the current parameter estimate, with the objec-tive of increasing the information available for subsequent multi-parameter estimation. The measurement at iteration t is represented by a set of projectors 

M (t) 

> k

= |m(t) 

> k

⟩⟨ m(t) 

> k

| , k = 1 , . . . , K t, (3) where |m(t) 

> k

⟩ denotes the k-th spatial mode implemented 5by the adaptive mode sorter and detected by a single-photon detector. In the ideal case, these modes form an orthonormal measurement basis over the collected optical subspace. For a source parameter vector θ, the expected photon count in mode k is Γ(t) 

> k

(θ) = Nt Tr 

h

ρ(θ)M (t)

> k

i

= Nt ⟨m(t) 

> k

| ρ(θ) |m(t) 

> k

⟩ , (4) where Nt is the expected total number of detected pho-tons during iteration t. Considering detector shot noise, the recorded counts z(t) 

> k

are modeled as independent Pois-son random variables, 

z(t) 

> k

∼ Poisson 

h

Γ(t) 

> k

(θ)

i

. (5) As the true source number is unknown, the candi-date number is initialized to an overestimate ˆN chosen to exceed the expected source population. This initial-ization reduces the risk of excluding faint companions at the beginning of the reconstruction. Candidates that are not supported by the measured photon statistics are subsequently pruned by the information-criterion-based model-selection step in Sec. II E. The initial measure-ment uses the first ten Zernike modes which are well matched to the circular aperture and provide a scene-agnostic initialization. Subsequent iterations replace this generic basis with modes adapted to the current source estimate.  

> C. Estimation in log-brightness coordinates

Given the photon counts recorded up to iteration t,we evaluate the likelihood of observing the measured data under a candidate source parameter vector θ. Un-der the Poisson counting model of Sec. II, the recorded counts z(τ ) 

> k

are independent random variables with means Γ(τ ) 

> k

(θ). The probability of observing the complete set of counts {z(τ ) 

> k

} is therefore the product of the correspond-ing Poisson probabilities. Omitting terms independent of 

θ, the resulting log-likelihood is 

Lt(θ) = 

> t

X 

> τ=1
> Kτ

X

> k=1

h

z(τ ) 

> k

ln Γ (τ ) 

> k

(θ) − Γ(τ ) 

> k

(θ)

i

, (6) which quantifies how likely the observed photon counts are under the source configuration specified by θ.Brightnesses in the target imaging regime may span several orders of magnitude. When parameterized di-rectly by the linear coordinates bn, the log-likelihood ex-hibits weak gradients for very dim sources, making the estimation problem poorly conditioned. We therefore ex-press each brightness in logarithmic coordinates, 

βn ≡ ln bn, (7) and estimate the source parameters by maximizing the log-likelihood, ˆ˜θ(t) = arg max 

> ˜θ∈B

Lt

 ˜θ



, (8) where ˜θ = ( x1, y 1, β 1, . . . , x N , y N , β N ). (9) The logarithmic parametrization places brightnesses that differ by many orders of magnitude on a comparable optimization scale, improving sensitivity to variations in extremely faint sources while preserving the relative or-dering of source intensities. This enables reliable estima-tion of companions whose brightness would be difficult to recover using linear coordinates. After convergence, the brightness estimates are transformed back to linear coordinates according to ˆbn = e ˆβn , (10) and subsequently normalized such that max 

> n

ˆbn = 1 . (11)  

> D. Adaptive basis from the multi-parameter QFIM

Given the current estimate ˆθ(t), we construct a mea-surement basis from the symmetric logarithmic deriva-tives (SLDs) of the one-photon density operator ρ. For each parameter θμ ∈ { xn, y n, b n}n, the corresponding SLD Lθμ is defined through 

∂θμ ρ = 12

 Lθμ ρ + ρL θμ

 . (12) The SLDs determine the quantum Fisher information matrix (QFIM) and therefore characterize the maximum information that can be extracted about the source pa-rameters from the detected photons. To compute them efficiently, we form the wavefunction matrix Φ = |ϕ1⟩, . . . , |ϕ ˆN ⟩, (13) perform a singular-value decomposition of Φ, and diago-nalize the density operator in the resulting support basis, 

ρ = X

> n

Dn|en⟩⟨ en|. (14) The matrix elements of Lθμ in the eigenbasis of ρ are then 

⟨em|Lθμ |en⟩ = 2 ⟨em|∂θμ ρ|en⟩

Dm + Dn

. (15) The measurement basis for the next iteration is con-structed from the union of the eigenbases of all SLDs, 

|m(t+1)  

> k

⟩ 3N 2 

> k=1

= 

> 3N2

[

> μ=1

Eigenbasis  Lθμ

 . (16) 6The resulting basis provides a near-optimal measure-ment by maximizing the quantum Fisher information available at the current estimate [53]. The adaptive up-date increases sensitivity to source positions and bright-nesses, particularly for dim companions, and comple-ments the log-brightness estimation strategy of Sec. II C.  

> E. Source-count selection by the Bayesian information criterion

The adaptive reconstruction is initialized with an over-complete set of candidate sources. After the measure-ment and estimation steps, this candidate set is re-duced by selecting the source count that best explains the recorded photon statistics. Previous multi-source quantum-inspired estimators often assume the source number N to be known in advance [48–50], or remove weak candidates using a prescribed brightness cutoff 

bmin [51, 54]. Such a cutoff is difficult to choose in the ultra-high-contrast regime, because a genuine faint companion and a numerical artifact can both appear with very small fitted brightness. We therefore use the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) to compare candi-date models with different source counts. Source-count selection is performed as a post-processing step using the photon counts already collected during the adaptive measurement. No additional photons are acquired, and the adaptive measurement basis is not re-optimized during this step. For a model containing k

retained sources, we define BIC( k) = −2 L⋆(k) + 3 k ln nmode , (17) where L⋆(k) is the log-likelihood of Eq. (6) evaluated for the k retained sources on the fixed measurement, 3 k is the number of free parameters for k sources ( xn, y n, b n), and 

nmode is the number of measurement modes accumulated across all iterations. The penalty 3 ln nmode per source is set entirely by the experiment, so the selection introduces no free parameter. The BIC approximates the log model evidence up to an additive constant and balances goodness of fit against model complexity [52]. Adding extra sources gen-erally increases the maximized likelihood, because the model has more degrees of freedom and can fit statis-tical fluctuations or numerical artifacts. The penalty term 3 k ln nmode discourages such overfitting by charging a complexity cost for each additional source parameter. The selected source count is therefore ˆN = arg min  

> k

BIC( k). (18) In this way, the source number is inferred from the mea-sured photon statistics rather than from a manually cho-sen brightness threshold. As with any information cri-terion, the selection is asymptotic and statistical in na-ture: finite photon counts, strong source overlap, or ex-tremely weak companions can still lead to under- or over-selection. Before applying BIC, we merge candidate sources that represent the same physical emitter. This step addresses occasional splitting in the maximum-likelihood recon-struction, where one source is represented by multiple nearby candidates. Two candidates i and j, with esti-mated positions ˆri = (ˆ xi, ˆyi), ˆrj = (ˆ xj , ˆyj ),

are connected if 

∥ˆri − ˆrj ∥ ≤ ∆merge , (19) where ∆ merge is chosen as the spatial resolution of the reconstruction grid, such as the detector pixel pitch. Each connected component is then replaced by a sin-gle candidate whose brightness is the sum of the compo-nent brightnesses and whose position is the brightness-weighted centroid, ˆrmerged =

P 

> i∈C

ˆbiˆri

P 

> i∈C

ˆbi

, ˆbmerged = X

> i∈C

ˆbi. (20) The BIC is then evaluated on the merged candidate set.  

> F. Algorithm summary

Algorithm 1 Adaptive ultra-high-contrast imaging.                                         

> 1: Initialize the candidate number ˆNas an overestimate of the expected source population.
> 2: Initialize the measurement basis {| m(0)
> k⟩} using the first ten Zernike modes.
> 3: for t= 1 , . . . , T do
> 4: Project the incoming field onto the current basis
> {| m(t−1)
> k⟩} and record photon counts {z(t)
> k}.
> 5: Estimate the source positions and log-brightness vari-ables by solving Eq. (8) using the accumulated photon counts from iterations 1 , . . . , t .
> 6: Construct the SLD-informed measurement subspace at the current estimate and orthonormalize it to obtain the next basis {| m(t)
> k⟩} , as in Eq. (16).
> 7: end for
> 8: Merge candidates whose estimated positions are separated by less than ∆ merge , using brightness-weighted centroids and summed brightnesses.
> 9: Evaluate BIC( k) for candidate source counts kon the merged candidate set, using the accumulated photon-count record.
> 10: Select the source count ˆNby minimizing BIC( k) over the merged candidate set (Eq. (17)).
> 11: return final estimates ˆθ⋆,ˆN⋆.
> III. SIMULATION SETUP

All quantitative results are obtained from Monte Carlo simulations of the imaging pipeline described in Sec. II. The image plane is discretized on a 64 × 64 Cartesian 7grid, and only grid points inside the circular field of view are used. In normalized coordinates, this field of view is written as 

{(x, y ) : x2 + y2 ≤ 1}.

The Gaussian point-spread-function width is fixed at σ =12 .8 pixels. This value is chosen by matching the full width at half maximum of the Gaussian intensity profile to that of a diffraction-limited Airy pattern [55], giving 

σ = 0 .437 λ/D. 

Since one Rayleigh unit is defined as 1 RU = 1 .22 λ/D, 

we have 1 RU = 2 .79 σ ≈ 35 .7 pixels .

Thus, one image-plane pixel corresponds to approxi-mately ∆pixel ≈ 0.028 RU .

Each test scene contains three mutually incoherent point sources: one bright host source and two faint com-panions. Their unnormalized relative brightnesses are set to 

{1, 10 −4, 10 −8},

corresponding to companion-to-host contrasts of 10 −4

and 10 −8. These values span eight orders of magnitude and are used to test the stability of the reconstruction in an ultra-high-contrast regime. For likelihood evaluation, the relative brightnesses are normalized according to the convention used in Sec. II C. Source positions are sampled within the circular field of view subject to a sub-Rayleigh separation constraint. Specifically, all accepted configurations satisfy max  

> i,j

∥ri − rj ∥ < 0.5 RU ,

so that the sources remain unresolved by conventional image-plane detection. At each adaptive iteration, the total expected photon count is set to approximately 10 12 , which aligns with the proposed photon limit to achieve a quantum limit [56]. This photon number denotes the integrated count over the measurement interval; it is therefore compatible with the weak-source single-photon model, provided that the mean photon number per temporal coherence mode re-mains much smaller than unity. Photon counts in each measurement mode are then drawn considering detector shot noise defined in Sec. II. The maximum-likelihood estimation problem in Eq. (8) is solved in MATLAB using the interior-point algorithm implemented in fmincon , embedded in a

GlobalSearch multi-start procedure. Analytic gradients with respect to the source positions and log-brightness variables are used, as described in Sec. II C. Unless oth-erwise stated, each scene is reconstructed using T = 7 adaptive measurement iterations.  

> IV. RESULTS

We evaluate the proposed method in simulated exoplanet-imaging scenarios representative of the most challenging detection regime: companions that are both extremely faint and located at sub-Rayleigh separations from a bright host star. Quantum-inspired spatial-mode measurements have demonstrated advantages over di-rect image-plane detection in sub-Rayleigh estimation problems [25, 34, 37, 42], and recent experiments have achieved faint-companion localization through mode sorting [23, 44]. Building on these developments, we as-sess the performance of the proposed adaptive framework in the exoplanet-detection regime, characterized by un-known source multiplicity, ultra-high contrast, and sub-Rayleigh separation. We therefore test the full adaptive pipeline developed in Sec. II: log-brightness maximum-likelihood estima-tion, SLD-informed basis updates, candidate merging, and BIC-based source-count selection. The first bench-mark evaluates recovery of a three-source scene with companion-to-host contrasts down to 10 −8 and pairwise separations below 0 .5 RU. The second benchmark intro-duces an unknown lateral shift between the source plane and the mode sorter to assess robustness against registra-tion errors. Together, these simulations quantify whether the proposed framework can recover source number, po-sition, and brightness in an exoplanet-like sub-Rayleigh detection regime without assuming the true source count or imposing an ad-hoc brightness threshold.  

> A. Sub-Rayleigh recovery at exoplanet-like contrast

We first evaluate the proposed method on a three-source benchmark designed to test recovery in the sub-Rayleigh, ultra-high-contrast regime. Each scene con-sists of three mutually incoherent point sources: a bright host and two faint companions with host-normalized brightnesses {1, 10 −4, 10 −8}. Equivalently, the two com-panions have planet-to-host contrasts of 10 −4 and 10 −8.Source positions are drawn uniformly within the field of view, subject to the constraint that all pairwise separa-tions are smaller than 0 .5 RU. Thus, all sources lie well within the Rayleigh scale. The reconstruction is initialized without knowledge of the true source count or source locations. Instead, the algorithm begins from an over-complete candidate set with ˆN sources and uses the first ten Zernike modes as a scene-independent initial measurement basis. After the adaptive iterations, the final source count is selected us-ing the BIC procedure described in Sec. II E, without imposing a brightness threshold. A trial is classified as successful if three conditions are satisfied: the selected source count equals the true value, each recovered source can be matched to a true source with a mean localiza-tion error below one pixel, and the brightness of each 8       

> FIG. 3. Three-source scene estimate in the sub-Rayleigh, ultra-high-contrast benchmark. Each scene contains one bright host and two faint companions with relative brightnesses {1,10 −4,10 −8}. (a) Scene estimation success rate versus minimum pairwise separation. Markers show bin-wise success rates, the shaded band shows the Wilson 95% confidence interval, and the dashed line marks the overall mean success rate of 72 .5%. (b) Localization error for trials with correct source-count selection. Markers denote the median, and the error bar denotes the interquartile range. The median localization error remains near 0 .1 pixel across the tested separation range, indicating subpixel astrometric recovery. (c) Cumulative brightness-error distributions for the 10 −4companions (top) and 10 −8companion (bottom). The 10 −4companion is recovered within a factor of 1 .2. The 10 −8
> companion has a median brightness-error factor of 1 .04, with 99 .3% within a factor of 1 .5 and 99 .7% within a factor of two.

faint companion is recovered within one order of mag-nitude. Figure 3 summarizes the recovery statistics over 12 ,000 Monte Carlo trials. The trials are grouped by min-imum pairwise separation into six bins of width 0 .05 RU, spanning 0 .20–0 .50 RU, with 2 ,000 trials per bin. To our knowledge, no prior method has demonstrated com-plete recovery for unknown source count at sub-Rayleigh separation and 10 −8 companion-to-host contrast; under the success criterion defined above, the corresponding re-ported benchmark success rate is therefore 0%. The proposed method recovers the complete three-source scene across the full sub-Rayleigh range consid-ered here. BIC alone identifies the correct source count in 75 .6% of all trials, without using a tunable detection threshold. The overall success rate is 72 .5%. As shown in Fig. 3(a), the success rate increases from 68 .2% in the 0.20–0 .25 RU bin to 75 .1% in the 0 .35–0 .40 RU bin, and remains close to 74% at larger separations. Although re-covery improves as the sources become more separated, the complete scene is still recovered in approximately seven out of ten trials even at the smallest separations tested. For trials in which all three sources are correctly re-covered, the astrometric error is presented in Fig. 3(b). The error remains well below the pixel scale. The me-dian localization error is approximately 0 .1 pixel across all separation bins, indicating that the adaptive spatial-mode measurement provides subpixel localization even when the sources are separated by less than 0 .5 RU. The photometric estimates are also stable over the eight-decade brightness range as illustrated in Fig. 3(c). For the 10 −4 companion, the recovered brightness lies within a factor of 1 .2 in every successful trial, with a me-dian brightness-error factor of 1 .00. For the 10 −8 com-panion, the median brightness-error factor is 1 .04; 99 .3% of successful trials fall within a factor of 1 .5, and 99 .7% fall within a factor of two. Taken together, these results show that the method can jointly estimate source number, source position, and companion brightness in simulated scenes that com-bine three difficult conditions: unknown source count, sub-Rayleigh separation, and companion-to-host contrast down to 10 −8. This regime is representative of the chal-lenges encountered in direct imaging of faint terrestrial-planet candidates, where the companion signal is both closely separated from the host star and many orders of magnitude weaker. Unlike fixed-source-number esti-mators or brightness-cutoff-based pruning, the present approach selects the source count from the accumulated photon statistics and retains the 10 −8 companion with-out a prescribed detection threshold.  

> B. Robustness to centroid misalignment

Practical mode-sorting measurements require registra-tion between the source coordinate system and the spa-tial modes implemented by the sorter. In fixed-basis quantum imaging, even a small mismatch between the as-sumed and actual scene centroid can substantially reduce the information extracted by the measurement [45, 49]. An exoplanet-detection protocol should therefore toler-ate an unknown lateral offset between the scene and the mode sorter basis. To test this tolerance, we repeat the benchmark of 9        

> FIG. 4. Overall recovery performance under source–mode sorter misalignment. The two Cartesian components of the imposed offset are sampled independently from U(−5,5), and trials with realized shift magnitude up to 6 pixels are retained. The imposed shift is not supplied to the estimator and is used only in post-processing for localization-error calculation. (a) Full success rate as a function of the minimum source separation in RU. Shaded band indicate 95% Wilson confidence intervals. The overall success rate is 71 .30%, close to the aligned-baseline value of 72 .5%. (b) Cumulative distribution of the mean localization error for recovered scenes where, 95 .97% have localization error below one pixel. (c) Cumulative distribution of the brightness-error factor for the 10 −4companion (top) and 10 −8companion (bottom). The median error factors are 1 .000 and 1.040, respectively, and 99 .76% of the 10 −8companion estimates lie within a factor of two.

Sec. IV A with an imposed misalignment between the source plane and the mode sorter coordinate system. For each Monte Carlo trial, the two Cartesian components of the offset are sampled independently as 

xshift , y shift ∼ U (−5, 5) . (21) In the retained evaluation set, the realized shift magni-tude ranges from 0 .08 to 6 .00 pixels, with a median value of 3 .90 pixels. The imposed shift is not supplied to the estimator. Af-ter the final measurement, in the post-processing stage, correction has been made to correctly calculate the lo-calization error. This correction is used only for error calculation; it is not used in the likelihood, BIC calcula-tion, basis construction, or source-count estimation. Figure 4 summarizes the overall recovery performance under this unknown misalignment. The mean success rate is 71 .3%, close to the aligned-baseline value, 72 .5% reported in Sec. IV A. BIC identifies the correct source count in 74 .38% of the misalignment trials, close to the 75 .6% obtained in the aligned-baseline case. The suc-cess rate is lowest in the smallest separation bin, 0 .20– 0.25 RU, where it is 66 .29%, and increases for larger separations, reaching 74 .61% in the 0 .40–0 .45 RU bin, as shown in Fig. 4(a). This indicates that the recovery probability is affected more strongly by source separation than by misalignment within the tested range. The recovered positions remain accurate after the mis-alignment is introduced. The cumulative distribution of the mean localization error shows that most success-fully recovered scenes have subpixel error, with 95 .97% of correctly counted trials below one pixel, as shown in Fig. 4(b). The photometric estimates show similar stabil-ity. The 10 −4 companion is recovered with a brightness-error factor close to unity, with a median factor of 1 .000, while the 10 −8 companion shows a broader but still sharply concentrated distribution, with a median factor of 1 .040 and 99 .76% of successfully recovered scenes lying within a factor of two of the true brightness, as shown in Fig. 4(c). These results show that the method maintains both subpixel astrometric accuracy and high-dynamic-range photometric recovery when the initial sorter basis is not registered to the source centroid. Figure 5 analyzes the results according to the real-ized shift magnitude. The success rate remains nearly flat across the tested offset range, varying only from 69 .58% to 73 .34% over the 0–6-pixel interval, as shown in Fig. 5(a). The Wilson confidence intervals overlap across shift bins, and no monotonic decrease in success rate is observed as the source–sorter displacement increases. The conditional error distributions support the same conclusion. The localization-error CDFs for the 0–2, 2– 4, and 4–6-pixel shift ranges are closely grouped, with median errors of 0 .123, 0 .133, and 0 .134 pixels, respec-tively, as shown in Fig. 5(b). The smallest-shift bin gives a slightly larger fraction of very low-error recov-eries, but the differences between shift bins are small compared with the full spread of the localization-error distribution. The brightness-error distributions for the 10 −8 companion are also nearly overlapping, as shown in Fig. 5(c). In all three shift ranges, the recovered bright-ness of the faint companion remains concentrated near the true value, with median brightness-error factors of 1.038, 1 .041, and 1 .040, respectively, and almost all suc-10     

> FIG. 5. Dependence of recovery performance on the realized source–mode sorter misalignment. The imposed misalignment is not provided to the estimator; the shift value is used only after estimation to evaluate localization error in the ground-truth coordinate system. (a) Full success rate as a function of shift magnitude. The success rate remains nearly flat over the 0–6-pixel range, varying from 69 .58% to 73 .34%. Shaded band indicate 95% Wilson confidence intervals. (b) Cumulative distributions of the mean localization error for the 0–2, 2–4, and 4–6-pixel shift regimes. The corresponding median errors are 0 .123, 0 .133, and 0 .134 pixels, respectively. (c) Cumulative distributions of the brightness-error factor for the 10 −8companion in the same shift regimes. The median brightness-error factors are 1 .038, 1 .041, and 1 .040, respectively. (d) Full success rate as a joint function of minimum source separation and shift regime. The curves do not show a monotonic degradation with increasing shift, indicating that recovery is governed more strongly by source separation than by the tested range of misalignment.

cessfully recovered scenes lie within a factor of two. Finally, Fig. 5(d) compares the success rate as a func-tion of both minimum separation and shift range. The curves for the three shift bins do not show a consistent ordering with shift magnitude. At fixed separation, the differences among the 0–2, 2–4, and 4–6-pixel cases are nonmonotonic, whereas the dependence on minimum sep-aration is more apparent. This indicates that, within the tested misalignment range, recovery is limited primarily by scene geometry rather than by the source–mode sorter registration error. The observed tolerance is consistent with the adap-tive basis update used by the proposed method. Since the measurement basis is recomputed from the current scene estimate during the iterative procedure, an initial mismatch between the assumed sorter frame and the ac-tual source distribution can be progressively absorbed into the estimation process. These results indicate that the proposed method can tolerate misalignment between the scene and the mode sorter.  

> C. Recovery under randomized brightness imbalance

We further evaluated the robustness of the proposed method to randomly varying extreme brightness ratios. Here, the ground-truth intensities were randomized over several orders of magnitude to test whether the recon-struction performance depends sensitively on a specific brightness hierarchy. For each Monte Carlo trial, one source was fixed at unit intensity, the second source was generated by draw-ing its base-10 exponent uniformly from 0 to −4, and the third source was generated by drawing its base-10 expo-nent uniformly from −4 to −8. This sampling procedure produced three-source scenes with a randomized bright-ness hierarchy and maximum brightness ratios spanning 11      

> FIG. 6. Scene recovery over randomized brightness ratio and minimum separation. The scene success rate is shown as a function of the minimum pairwise separation and the maxi-mum brightness ratio. In each Monte Carlo trial, the ground-truth source intensities were randomly assigned before nor-malization: one source was fixed at unit intensity, the sec-ond source was sampled between 10 0and 10 −4, and the third source was sampled between 10 −4and 10 −8.The vertical axis denotes the largest-to-smallest intensity ratio in the gen-erated scene, and the color scale indicates the corresponding scene success rate. The displayed heatmap was smoothed for improved visualization. The method maintains high recovery performance over the tested parameter space, with success rates close to 80% across broad regions below a maximum brightness ratio of 10 8.

up to 10 8. The source positions were sampled subject to the prescribed minimum-separation condition, allow-ing the recovery performance to be evaluated jointly as a function of source geometry and brightness imbalance. Figure 6 shows the resulting scene success rate as a function of minimum pairwise separation and maximum brightness ratio. The proposed method achieves strong recovery performance over most of the tested parameter space. For maximum brightness ratios below 10 8, the success rate remains close to 80% across broad regions of the map, indicating that the adaptive measurement pro-tocol remains effective even when the source intensities are randomly varied over several orders of magnitude. The performance does not show a strong systematic degradation with brightness ratio alone. Instead, the re-covery map indicates that the success rate is governed by the combined effect of brightness imbalance and source separation. Localized reductions in performance appear in some regions near the most extreme brightness ratios, but the overall recovery remains high throughout most of the domain. This behavior suggests that the adap-tive basis update and log-brightness estimation provide stable reconstruction performance without requiring the relative source intensities to be fixed in advance. These results extend the fixed-contrast benchmark by demonstrating that the proposed method can recover three-source scenes with randomized intensity ratios over a broad dynamic range. The near-80% success rate over much of the separation–brightness-ratio map shows that the method is robust to variations in the underly-ing brightness distribution, including highly imbalanced scenes approaching a maximum brightness ratio of 10 8. 

> V. DISCUSSION

The results reported above should be interpreted as a simulation-level demonstration of adaptive quantum-inspired source recovery in a regime that combines three difficulties that are usually treated separately: sub-Rayleigh separation, unknown source multiplicity, and ultra-high brightness contrast. The original SPADE the-ory showed that spatial-mode measurements can avoid the Rayleigh curse for estimating the separation of two incoherent point sources under ideal conditions [25], and subsequent experiments confirmed quantum-inspired su-perresolution for two-source or weak-secondary-source tasks [26, 28, 44]. Those studies established the informa-tion advantage of mode-resolved measurements, but gen-erally considered either two sources, known or restricted source models, equal or moderate brightness imbalance, or a hypothesis-testing problem rather than full scene reconstruction. In contrast, the present method esti-mates the number, positions, and brightnesses of mul-tiple mutually incoherent sources without assuming the true source count. The use of log-brightness coordinates and BIC-based source-count selection is therefore the main algorithmic extension beyond fixed-source-number or threshold-based recovery. The randomized-brightness analysis further shows that the observed performance is not specific to the fixed nor-malized brightness configuration {1, 10 −4, 10 −8}. The configuration was used as a representative ultra-high-contrast benchmark, but it does not define the operating range of the method. In the additional brightness-ratio sweep, each scene was normalized such that the bright-est source had unit brightness, and the relative bright-ness of the faint source was varied over the extreme range from 10 −4 to 10 −8. The resulting separation–brightness map shows that the method maintains high recovery per-formance over most of the tested parameter space, with success rates close to 80% across broad regions. This in-dicates that the adaptive measurement is not tuned to a single prescribed brightness hierarchy, but remains effec-tive across a wide dynamic range of source intensities. This generalization is important for exoplanet-oriented imaging, because realistic scenes are not expected to fol-low one fixed contrast triplet. Companion brightness de-pends on planetary radius, albedo, orbital phase, wave-length, and host-star properties, and the relevant con-trast can vary substantially from target to target. A12 method that succeeds only for a single chosen configu-ration would therefore have limited practical relevance. The present results instead show that the combination of adaptive basis updates, log-brightness estimation, and BIC-based source-count selection remains stable when the relative source brightnesses vary across several or-ders of magnitude after normalization to the brightest source. Thus, the method extends beyond the specific 

{1, 10 −4, 10 −8} benchmark and supports recovery in a broader class of highly imbalanced multi-source scenes. The comparison with exoplanet-oriented mode-sorting coronagraphy is particularly relevant. Recent quantum-optimal coronagraph work showed that rejecting the fun-damental mode of an on-axis star while transmitting higher-order modes can approach quantum limits for high-contrast companion detection and localization [56], and an experimental spatial mode sorter implementa-tion localized an artificial companion at sub-diffraction separation with a normalized companion brightness of 10 −3 relative to the host star [23]. The present simula-tions extend this regime to normalized companion bright-nesses approaching 10 −8, corresponding to a five-order-of-magnitude deeper contrast than that demonstrated ex-perimentally in that mode sorter coronagraph setting. Moreover, the proposed method does not only suppress or detect a companion; it reconstructs a three-source scene and selects the source count from the measured pho-ton statistics. This is the central improvement demon-strated by the present numerical study. At the same time, the comparison should be made cautiously, because the present work is not an experimental demonstration and does not yet include the full instrumental error bud-get of a real mode sorter or telescope. The main limitation of the present study is that all quantitative results are obtained from simulations. The model assumes a Gaussian PSF, mutually incoherent point sources, detector shot noise, ideal modal projec-tions, and a known finite computational field of view. Real astronomical observations would introduce addi-tional degradation mechanisms, including finite telescope pupils, Airy or aberrated PSFs, chromaticity, stellar leak-age, residual wavefront errors, background photons, de-tector dark counts, read noise, finite mode sorter effi-ciency, intermodal crosstalk, imperfect calibration, and time-dependent pointing jitter. Prior analyses show that SPADE-type measurements can be strongly affected by crosstalk, dark counts, and misalignment, even when their ideal performance is quantum-optimal [39, 45]. Therefore, the present success rates should be understood as an upper-bound or proof-of-principle estimate under controlled assumptions, not as a direct prediction of on-sky performance. Several improvements are needed to move the method toward experimental or astronomical deployment. First, the forward model should be extended from a Gaus-sian PSF to pupil-dependent, aberrated, and wavelength-dependent PSFs, with calibration errors included directly in the likelihood. Second, the measurement model should include finite mode sorter extinction, mode-dependent throughput, crosstalk, detector dark counts, and back-ground light, so that the adaptive basis is optimized under realistic rather than ideal measurement statistics. Third, the source model should be generalized beyond three point sources to include larger source populations, circumstellar-disk backgrounds, and sparse or hierarchi-cal priors. This last direction is important because multi-source localization has fundamental information-theoretic limitations at arbitrarily small separations; for example, the QFIM can become rank-limited in the extreme sub-Rayleigh limit, preventing all indepen-dent source parameters from being estimated simulta-neously [34]. Incorporating such limits into the model-selection and adaptive-measurement strategy could im-prove robustness in the low-separation bins where the current success rate remains below the wider-separation performance.  

> VI. CONCLUSION

We have presented an adaptive spatial-mode mea-surement framework for ultra-high-contrast source recov-ery in the sub-Rayleigh regime. The method combines SLD-informed adaptive basis construction, maximum-likelihood estimation in log-brightness coordinates, can-didate merging, and BIC-based source-count selection. This combination allows the algorithm to infer the num-ber, positions, and relative brightnesses of mutually in-coherent point sources without assuming the true source count or imposing a manually chosen brightness thresh-old. Monte Carlo simulations show that the method can recover three-source scenes with all pairwise sep-arations below 0.5 RU and normalized brightnesses 

{1, 10 −4, 10 −8}, where the brightest source is set to unit brightness. In the aligned case, the complete scene is re-covered with a mean success rate of 72 .5%, while BIC identifies the correct source count in 75 .6% of trials. For successfully recovered scenes, the method achieves sub-pixel localization and stable photometric recovery, with the 10 −8 source estimated within a factor of two in 99 .7% of successful trials. Additional simulations with randomized brightness ra-tios show that the method is not restricted to this single fixed brightness triplet. After normalizing each scene so that the brightest source has unit brightness, the method maintains high recovery performance across a broad dy-namic range in which the faint-source brightness varies from 10 −4 to 10 −8. The success rate remains close to 80% over much of the separation–brightness-ratio map, demonstrating that the adaptive measurement remains robust under extreme and variable brightness imbalance. The method also remains robust to misalignment be-tween the source plane and mode sorter. For imposed shifts up to six pixels, the mean success rate remains 71 .3%, close to the aligned-baseline result, and the re-13 covered brightness of the 10 −8 source remains within a factor of two in nearly all successful scenes. Taken together, these results indicate that adaptive quantum-inspired spatial-mode measurements can recover simu-lated faint companions in a regime where conventional image-plane measurements and fixed suppression-based approaches are strongly challenged. Future experimental validation under realistic optical, detector, and calibra-tion noise will be necessary to determine the practical limits of the approach for astronomical exoplanet detec-tion. 

[1] L. Kaltenegger and J. K. Faherty, Nature 594 , 505 (2021). [2] J. K. Barstow, Nature Astronomy , 1 (2025). [3] L. Welbanks, M. C. Nixon, P. McGill, L. J. Tilke, L. S. Wiser, Y. Rotman, S. Mukherjee, A. D. Feinstein, M. R. Line, B. Benneke, et al. , Nature Astronomy 10 , 234 (2026). [4] M. Mayor and D. Queloz, Nature 378 , 355 (1995). [5] W. J. Borucki, D. Koch, G. Basri, N. Batalha, T. Brown, D. Caldwell, J. Caldwell, J. Christensen-Dalsgaard, W. D. Cochran, E. DeVore, et al. , Science 327 , 977 (2010). [6] G. R. Ricker, D. Latham, R. Vanderspek, K. Ennico, G. Bakos, T. Brown, A. Burgasser, D. Charbonneau, M. Clampin, L. Deming, et al. , in American Astronomi-cal Society Meeting Abstracts# 215 , Vol. 215 (2010) pp. 450–06. [7] J. L. Christiansen, D. L. McElroy, M. Harbut, D. R. Cia-rdi, M. Crane, J. Good, K. K. Hardegree-Ullman, A. Y. Kesseli, M. B. Lund, M. Lynn, et al. , The Planetary Sci-ence Journal 6, 186 (2025). [8] N. C. Hara and E. B. Ford, Annual Review of Statistics and Its Application 10 , 623 (2023). [9] F. Pepe, D. Ehrenreich, and M. R. Meyer, Nature 513 ,358 (2014). [10] Z. Dai, D. Ni, L. Pan, and Y. Zhu, in Journal of Physics: Conference Series , Vol. 2012 (IOP Publishing, 2021) p. 012135. [11] H. Choi, J. Chen, V. Aggarwal, and Z. Jacob, Journal of the Optical Society of America A 43 , 236 (2026). [12] M. A. Kenworthy and S. Y. Haffert, Annual Review of Astronomy and Astrophysics 63 (2025). [13] A. Vigan, C. Fontanive, M. Meyer, B. Biller, M. Bonavita, M. Feldt, S. Desidera, G.-D. Marleau, A. Emsenhuber, R. Galicher, et al. , Astronomy & As-trophysics 651 , A72 (2021). [14] E. Cady, N. Bowman, A. Z. Greenbaum, J. G. Ingalls, B. Kern, J. Krist, D. Marx, I. Poberezhskiy, A. Eldo-rado Riggs, G. Ruane, et al. , Journal of Astronomical Telescopes, Instruments, and Systems 11 , 021408 (2025). [15] J. F. Kasting, D. P. Whitmire, and R. T. Reynolds, Icarus 

101 , 108 (1993). [16] R. K. Kopparapu, R. Ramirez, J. F. Kasting, V. Eymet, T. D. Robinson, S. Mahadevan, R. C. Terrien, S. Domagal-Goldman, V. Meadows, and R. Deshpande, The Astrophysical Journal 765 , 131 (2013). [17] C. K. Harada, C. D. Dressing, S. R. Kane, and B. A. Ardestani, The Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 

272 , 30 (2024). [18] N. W. Tuchow, C. C. Stark, and E. Mamajek, The As-tronomical Journal 167 , 139 (2024). [19] G. Ruane, J. Wang, D. Mawet, N. Jovanovic, J.-R. De-lorme, B. Mennesson, and J. K. Wallace, The Astrophys-ical Journal 867 , 143 (2018). [20] D. Mawet, E. Serabyn, K. Liewer, R. Burruss, J. Hickey, and D. Shemo, The Astrophysical Journal 709 , 53 (2010). [21] E. Serabyn, E. Huby, K. Matthews, D. Mawet, O. Absil, B. Femenia, P. Wizinowich, M. Karlsson, M. Bottom, R. Campbell, et al. , The Astronomical Journal 153 , 43 (2017). [22] A. Potier, R. Galicher, P. Baudoz, E. Huby, J. Milli, Z. Wahhaj, A. Boccaletti, A. Vigan, M. N’Diaye, and J.-F. Sauvage, Astronomy & Astrophysics 638 , A117 (2020). [23] N. Deshler, I. Ozer, A. Ashok, and S. Guha, Optica 12 ,518 (2025). [24] E. Tonucci, S. Haffert, W. Foster, J. Males, O. Guyon, L. M. Close, K. Van Gorkom, A. Hedglen, P. Johnson, M. Kautz, et al. , Astronomy & Astrophysics 708 , A144 (2026). [25] M. Tsang, R. Nair, and X.-M. Lu, Physical Review X 6,031033 (2016). [26] M. Pa´ ur, B. Stoklasa, Z. Hradil, L. L. S´ anchez-Soto, and J. Rehacek, Optica 3, 1144 (2016). [27] F. Yang, A. Tashchilina, E. S. Moiseev, C. Simon, and A. I. Lvovsky, Optica 3, 1148 (2016). [28] W.-K. Tham, H. Ferretti, and A. M. Steinberg, Physical Review Letters 118 , 070801 (2017). [29] J. ˇReh´ aˇ cek, Z. Hradil, D. Koutn` y, J. Grover, A. Krzic, and L. L. S´ anchez-Soto, Physical review A 98 , 012103 (2018). [30] S. Prasad, Physica Scripta 95 , 054004 (2020). [31] J. Xin, Y. Li, and X.-M. Lu, Physical Review A 103 ,052604 (2021). [32] M. Tsang, New Journal of Physics 19 , 023054 (2017). [33] M. Tsang, Physical Review A 99 , 012305 (2019). [34] E. Bisketzi, D. Branford, and A. Datta, New Journal of Physics 21 , 123032 (2019). [35] S. Zhou and L. Jiang, Physical Review A 99 , 013808 (2019). [36] M. R. Grace, Z. Dutton, A. Ashok, and S. Guha, Journal of the Optical Society of America A 37 , 1288 (2020). [37] F. Bao, H. Choi, V. Aggarwal, and Z. Jacob, Optics Let-ters 46 , 3045 (2021). [38] H. Choi, F. Bao, and Z. Jacob, New Journal of Physics 

26 , 073050 (2024). [39] M. Gessner, C. Fabre, and N. Treps, Physical Review Letters 125 , 100501 (2020). [40] C. Oh, S. Zhou, Y. Wong, and L. Jiang, Physical Review Letters 126 , 120502 (2021). [41] Y. L. Len, C. Datta, M. Parniak, and K. Banaszek, In-ternational Journal of Quantum Information 18 , 1941015 (2020). [42] Z. Huang and C. Lupo, arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.00488 (2021). [43] M. R. Grace and S. Guha, Physical Review Letters 129 ,14 

180502 (2022). [44] U. Zanforlin, C. Lupo, P. W. Connolly, P. Kok, G. S. Buller, and Z. Huang, Nature Communications 13 , 5373 (2022). [45] T. Linowski, K. Schlichtholz, and G. Sorelli, Physical Re-view Applied 24 , 044052 (2025). [46] C. Napoli, S. Piano, R. Leach, G. Adesso, and T. Tu-farelli, Physical review letters 122 , 140505 (2019). [47] S. Prasad and Z. Yu, Physical Review A 99 , 022116 (2019). [48] G. Sorelli, M. Gessner, M. Walschaers, and N. Treps, Physical Review A 104 , 033515 (2021). [49] C. Rouvi` ere, D. Barral, A. Grateau, I. Karuseichyk, G. Sorelli, M. Walschaers, and N. Treps, Optica 11 , 166 (2024). [50] L. Santamaria, F. Sgobba, and C. Lupo, Optica Quantum 

2, 46 (2024). [51] H. Choi, Z. Jacob, and H. W. Baac, ACS Photonics 12 ,5522 (2025). [52] G. Schwarz, The annals of statistics , 461 (1978). [53] G. T´ oth and I. Apellaniz, Journal of Physics A: Mathe-matical and Theoretical 47 , 424006 (2014). [54] H. Choi, S. Choi, P. Menart, A. Deka, and Z. Jacob, New Journal of Physics 26 , 093019 (2024). [55] N. Henbest and M. Marten, The New Astronomy , 2nd ed. (Cambridge University Press, 1996). [56] N. Deshler, S. Haffert, and A. Ashok, Physical Review A 

113 , 042406 (2026).