Title: Reflation: redox-driven atmospheric inflation as tracer of super-Earth geochemistry

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.13793v1

Published Time: Thu, 16 Jul 2026 01:02:45 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
> Draft version July 16, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

Reflation : redox-driven atmospheric inflation as tracer of super-Earth geochemistry 

Lorenzo Cesario ,1 Tim Lichtenberg ,1 Mara Attia ,1 Harrison Nicholls ,2 Imre Kisv´ ardai ,1 and Quentin Changeat 1

> 1Kapteyn Astronomical Institute, University of Groningen, 9747 AD Groningen, The Netherlands
> 2Institute of Astronomy, University of Cambridge, Madingley Road, Cambridge CB3 0HA, UK

ABSTRACT We demonstrate that the redox-sensitivity of mantle outgassing can trigger transient episodes of at-mospheric re-inflation in highly irradiated and geochemically-reduced super-Earths, a mechanism we term reflation . Mantle redox governs the outgassing and speciation of CHONS volatiles, setting the background secondary atmospheric composition during extended photoevaporation at highly irradiated conditions. Using simulations of the coupled atmosphere-interior evolution of irradiated super-Earths, we illustrate that reduced mantles close to the iron-w¨ ustite buffer initially produce CO-dominated atmospheres. Hydrodynamic escape continuously removes volatiles while outgassing from the melt re-plenishes the atmosphere with H 2, converted from H 2O dissolved in the underlying magma ocean. This leads to a late-stage transition from C- to H-dominated gas that transiently re-inflates super-Earth atmospheres and decreases their bulk densities by up to ∼ 60% between several hundreds of Myr to Gyr after their formation, prior to complete atmospheric erosion by photoevaporation. In contrast, ox-idised mantles, closer to Earth-like geochemistry, strongly buffer their atmospheric composition while exposed to hydrodynamic escape, producing monotonic radius deflation. Reflation events are triggered by geochemically-reduced mantles, intermediate escape efficiencies, high irradiation, and initial water inventories ≳ 5 Earth oceans. This redox-dependent evolutionary divergence hinges on the sensitive feedback between interior and atmospheric evolution serving as a potential tracer of historical geo-chemical state. Population-level reflation signatures of close-in super-Earths may thus serve as tracers of interior geochemistry and formation conditions. 

1. INTRODUCTION What determines whether a rocky exoplanet retains an atmosphere, and what that atmosphere is made of? Transit surveys have uncovered a striking bimodality in the radius distribution of close-in planets (B. J. Ful-ton & E. A. Petigura 2018; R. Luque & E. Pall´ e 2022): gas-rich sub-Neptunes above Rp ≈ 1.8 R⊕ and super-Earths below, separated by a ‘radius valley’ commonly attributed to atmospheric escape (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; A. Gupta & H. E. Schlichting 2019). Yet the fate of the stripped ‘cores’ remains unclear. Some may be truly devolatilised remnants (L. A. Rogers 2015), others may hold onto, or re-generate, secondary atmospheres through degassing from their interiors (F. Gaillard et al. 2021; R. Hu et al. 2023). Distinguishing between these outcomes is now within reach of JWST and upcoming missions (J. L. Bean et al. 2021; T. P. Greene et al. 2023; E. M.-R. Kempton & H. A. Knutson 2024), but inter-preting the observations requires understanding how in-

> Email: lorenzo.cesario.research@gmail.com, tim.lichtenberg@rug.nl

terior geochemistry shapes atmosphere climates and ob-servables over Gyr timescales (R. Wordsworth & L. Krei-dberg 2022; T. Lichtenberg & Y. Miguel 2025). Recent observational studies have found some of the most ir-radiated super-Earths to be inconsistent with bare-rock surfaces (S. Zieba et al. 2022; R. Hu et al. 2024; P. C. Au-gust et al. 2025; C. Monaghan et al. 2025; J. K. Teske et al. 2025; B. Park Coy et al. 2026). These findings deviate from what one would expect if hydrodynamic escape is the dominant driver of atmospheric evolution of highly irradiated super-Earths. A central, yet poorly constrained, control over plan-etary observables is mantle redox geochemistry, which sets the solubility of volatile species dissolved within sil-icate melts and comprising outgassed atmospheres (F. Gaillard et al. 2021; P. A. Sossi et al. 2023; B. R. Frost 2018). Oxidised mantles tend to outgas heavier CO 2-and H 2O-dominated atmospheres, while reduced man-tles favour lighter CO and H 2 compositions (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; G. Ortenzi et al. 2020; F. Gaillard et al. 2022). Mantle redox state is thus directly correlated with atmospheric mean molecular weight (MMW), scale arXiv:2607.13793v1 [astro-ph.EP] 15 Jul 2026 2height, transit depth, and inferred bulk density of ob-servable exoplanets (C. Dorn & T. Lichtenberg 2021; T. Lichtenberg 2021; I. D. Boer et al. 2025; C. Cherubim et al. 2025; D. J. Bower et al. 2025; H. Nicholls et al. 2026). On highly irradiated orbits, efficient atmospheric escape processes operate on timescales comparable to in-terior cooling (J. E. Owen 2019; T. Yoshida et al. 2024), yet the coupled feedback between redox-controlled out-gassing and composition-dependent mass loss is cur-rently lacking clear observational predictions to distin-guish between potential evolution pathways (E. M.-R. Kempton & H. A. Knutson 2024; T. Lichtenberg et al. 2025a). Here we use a coupled interior–atmosphere evolu-tion model to show that the interplay between redox-controlled outgassing and hydrodynamic escape leads to transient, late-stage atmospheric re-inflation enabled by geochemically-driven shifts in atmospheric composi-tion, which we term reflation . Rather than monotoni-cally stripping a planet’s secondary envelope, removal of volatile elements by hydrodynamic mass-loss enables a compositional transformation which temporarily inflates a planet’s observable radius. This only takes place at reducing interior states, but not at oxidized, Earth-like internal geochemistry. Our results thus suggest that the atmosphere presents an evolving record of the deep in-terior redox geochemistry. We present case studies and map the preferred parameter conditions under which re-flation occurs, then discuss the limitations of our em-ployed methods, and the potential implications of the reflation mechanism for observational facilities to test.  

> 2.

METHODS 2.1. Coupled interior-atmosphere framework 

We simulate the coupled interior-atmosphere evolu-tion of super-Earth planets across a physically-informed parameter space using the modular proteus 3 frame-work (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2021; H. Nicholls et al. 2024, 2025b). Starting from a fully-molten state, 

proteus time-marches planetary evolution while self-consistently facilitating columnar interactions between physical, chemical, and dynamical processes by sharing state variables (e.g. surface temperature, melt fraction, atmospheric composition, radiation fluxes) until atmo-spheric escape occurs. These planets are simulated with a conceptual three-domain approach, each of which is handled by one of the ‘submodules’ within the proteus framework. The 

interior domain, handled by spider (D. J. Bower et al.  

> 3https://proteus-framework.org

2018, 2019, 2022), solves the interior structure and en-ergy continuity equations to evolve radial profiles of en-ergy fluxes, mantle temperature, melt fraction, and vis-cosity over time. The atmospheric domain, which is outgassed at the interior-atmosphere surface, is solved using radiative-convective climate calculations by agni 

(H. Nicholls et al. 2025a,b, Section 2.2). The stellar do-main resolves the stellar radiation impinging upon the planet, spectroscopically and temporally, using mors 

(C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021; F. Spada et al. 2013). Sec-tion 2.3 details our energy-limited hydrodynamic atmo-spheric escape calculations (E. D. Lopez & J. J. Fortney 2014; O. R. Lehmer & D. C. Catling 2017; D. M. Hunten et al. 1987). Atmospheric physics and chemistry largely act on shorter timescales than mantle geodynamics, while at-mospheric blanketing remains key for regulating plane-tary cooling rates (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; L. T. Elkins-Tanton 2008; Y. Abe & T. Matsui 1986). Here, evo-lution is time-marched iteratively with the atmosphere and stellar domains. The interior domain is subject to an energy flux boundary condition calculated from the atmosphere, ensuring a full physical feedback loop. 

proteus is participating in the undergoing benchmark and intercomparison project chili (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2025b), part of the CUISINES exoplanet model inter-comparison framework (L. E. Sohl et al. 2024), which provides a controlled baseline for comparing simulations of planetary evolution. 2.2. Volatile outgassing and climate model 

At each time-step of proteus , the partial pressures of the volatile species H 2O, H 2, CH 4, CO 2, CO, N 2, NH 3,SO 2, H 2S, S 2, and O 2 at the atmosphere-interior (sur-face) interface are calculated using the calliope sub-module (D. J. Bower et al. 2019, 2022; P. A. Sossi et al. 2023; H. Nicholls et al. 2024, 2025b). Given a surface temperature Ts and the total abundance of CHNS ele-ments ( M tot  

> e

) distributed across the mantle plus atmo-sphere system, calliope solves for the elemental parti-tioning between the atmosphere and interior reservoirs subject to mass conservation: M atm  

> e

+M int  

> e

= M tot  

> e

. The distribution of oxygen atoms is treated separately and is not conserved across different simulations, because the oxygen is fundamentally coupled to the redox chem-istry buffering throughout the mantle (P. A. Sossi et al. 2020; T. Lichtenberg 2021). We set the upper-mantle oxygen fugacity f O2 – treated as equal to the partial pressure of O 2 – relative to the temperature-dependent iron–w¨ ustite buffer reaction (H. S. C. O’Neill & S. M. Eggins 2002), which implicitly resolves the dispropor-tionation of Fe after core segregation. The mass of each 3CHNOS element in the atmosphere reservoir is then ob-tained by summing over all partial surface pressures: 

M atm  

> e

= 4 πR 2int g P 

> j

pj (μj /μ ). Thermochemical reac-tions between the gases are modelled using temperature-dependent equilibrium coefficients Keq for each combi-nation of species (H. Nicholls et al. 2025b; M. W. Chase 1986; L. Schaefer & B. Fegley 2017). Simultaneously, the dissolved mass of each element is obtained by sum-ming over the corresponding dissolved phases; e.g. OH –

for H 2O (H. Nicholls et al. 2024; D. J. Bower et al. 2022). All volatiles partition at thermochemical-solubility equi-librium using empirical solubility laws to relate their partial pressures pj to dissolved phases’ concentrations 

xj (P. A. Sossi et al. 2023; F. Gaillard et al. 2022; J. E. Dixon 1997; L. S. Armstrong et al. 2015; P. Ardia et al. 2013; R. Dasgupta et al. 2022). Outgassed composi-tions are strongly coupled to the interior geochemistry, because volatile solubilities and chemical equilibria sen-sitively depend on the mantle redox state – proxied by 

f O2 – in addition to temperature and pressure (F. Gail-lard et al. 2022; G. Ortenzi et al. 2020; L. Schaefer & B. Fegley 2017). The planet’s cooling rate, photospheric radius, and bulk density are obtained by modelling the atmosphere’s radiative-convective structure at each time-step (H. Nicholls et al. 2025a,b). Our models assume that the at-mosphere attains a steady state on time-scales shorter than the interior geodynamics, so the surface temper-atures and partial pressures represent input parame-ters to the climate calculations, from the preceding partitioning-outgassing solution. We use agni to solve for radiative-convective equilibrium and the total cool-ing rate of the planet by enforcing energy flux con-servation throughout each layer of the atmosphere (H. Nicholls et al. 2025b). Our strictly energy conserving formalism permits the formation of convectively-stable layers within the atmosphere, yielding realistic cool-ing rates and climates (F. Selsis et al. 2023; T. Guil-lot 2010; J. Cmiel et al. 2025). Spectroscopic radiation fluxes are calculated with the socrates radiative trans-fer code (J. M. Edwards & A. Slingo 1996; J. Manners 2024; D. E. Sergeev et al. 2023), under the two-stream and plane-parallel approximations. Opacities are com-bined using a correlated-k method (A. A. Lacis & V. Oinas 1991), including Rayleigh scattering, but neglect-ing clouds or other aerosols (N. Madhusudhan et al. 2016; L. J. Janssen et al. 2026). Atmospheric convec-tion is parametrised using mixing length theory under the Schwarzschild criterion (M. Joyce & J. Tayar 2023; M. S. Marley & T. D. Robinson 2015; E. Vitense 1953; U. H¨ ogstr¨ om 1988). The incoming stellar radiation represents the top boundary condition for our radiative-convective calcu-lations, and is obtained from the mors stellar evolution model in parallel to the X-ray and ultraviolet (XUV) irradiation fluxes (C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021). Stel-lar rotational evolution is treated using a two-shell ap-proach; calculated angular momentum exchange within the star and with the stellar wind provide XUV fluxes through empirically-derived scaling relations, as func-tions of stellar age (F. Spada et al. 2013; A. S. Brun & M. K. Browning 2017). 2.3. Hydrodynamic escape model 

We model atmospheric mass loss using a parametrisa-tion of hydrodynamic energy-limited escape (e.g., A. J. Watson et al. 1981; H. Lammer et al. 2003), which dom-inates on close-in planets during the early high-XUV phase of stellar evolution (e.g., A. P. Jackson et al. 2012; C. Pezzotti et al. 2021; M. Attia et al. 2025). In this for-mulation, stellar XUV flux absorbed at the top of the atmosphere heats the gas, driving a bulk outflow at a rate ˙Mbulk = ηπR 3XUV FXUV /(GM p), where η is the es-cape efficiency, i.e., the fraction of absorbed XUV energy lifting the escaping gas, RXUV is the radius at which the atmosphere becomes optically thick to XUV radiation, 

FXUV is the incident stellar XUV flux, G is the gravi-tational constant, and Mp is the planet mass. RXUV is determined self-consistently from the atmospheric struc-ture computed by the climate module agni , evaluated at a reference pressure PXUV of 20 mbar (O. R. Lehmer & D. C. Catling 2017; E. D. Lopez & J. J. Fortney 2014). The time-dependent FXUV is provided by the mors stel-lar evolution model (C. P. Johnstone et al. 2021) using rotation-activity evolution tracks from F. Spada et al. (2013). We treat the escaping outflow as compositionally un-fractionating; each volatile element e escapes at a rate proportional to its atmospheric mass fraction, ˙Me =(Me/M atm ) × ˙Mbulk , where Me is the mass of element 

e in the atmosphere and M atm is the total atmosphere mass (Section 2.2). Although the escape process itself does not preferentially remove any species, it nonethe-less fractionates the bulk planetary volatile inventory because the escaping composition reflects the outgassed atmospheric mixture, which differs from the total plan-etary (mantle plus atmosphere) inventory (H. Nicholls et al. 2026). Our escape treatment thus does not pref-erentially remove or retain species within the outflow itself, but rather includes the bulk atmospheric elemen-tal inventory in the outflow. Therefore, low solubility elements, like carbon (D. J. Bower et al. 2022), are pref-erentially concentrated in the atmosphere and thus lost 4to space, and this is taken into account in molecular abundances calculations (e.g. CO). Strong coupling be-tween redox-controlled atmospheric speciation and es-cape is the mechanism that drives the compositional shift central to the reflation effect. We note that species-dependent fractionation in the upper-atmosphere out-flow (e.g., M. Schulik & R. A. Booth 2023; C. Cherubim et al. 2024, 2025; J. Krissansen-Totton et al. 2024; M. Valatsou et al. 2026), not modelled here, may further modulate the MMW evolution and the magnitude of re-flation. At each simulation time step, the escape, outgassing, and climate calculations are coupled. After updating 

FXUV as a function of stellar age, initialised at 100 Myr, we compute the bulk mass-loss rate and distribute it across the CHNOS elements. We then subtract the in-tegrated per-element mass loss ˙Me × dt from the bulk volatile inventory. The outgassing module ( calliope )then speciates the remaining volatile masses according to the chemistry, solubilities, and the mantle redox state. Finally for a given iteration, the atmosphere thermal structure and the new RXUV are recalculated. This coherent coupling ensures that changes in atmospheric composition and structure interact with the outgassing and the escape, capturing non-linear feedback between interior geochemistry and atmospheric evolution. 2.4. Simulation ensemble parameters 

Ultra-short period rocky planets orbit very close to their stars ( <0.5 AU) with orbital periods on the or-der of 1 day. Therefore, due to their close-in orbits, they are expected to be tidally locked into axial-orbital rotation synchrony and subject to extreme instellation fluxes on the order of 10 3 times Earth’s. Due to their extreme irradiation conditions, ultra-short period plan-ets can readily retain a molten state, and are likely to lose their atmospheres due to stripping from their host star. However, recent observational studies have shown some of these planets to be inconsistent with bare rock surfaces (S. Zieba et al. 2022; R. Hu et al. 2024; P. C. August et al. 2025; C. Monaghan et al. 2025; J. K. Teske et al. 2025; B. Park Coy et al. 2026). In this study, our original goal was to understand un-der which initial conditions and physical regimes ultra-short period planets retain their atmospheres. The sim-ulations shown in this work are inspired by the phys-ical characteristics of to the ultra-short period super-Earth TOI-500 b: a 1 .42 M⊕ planet orbiting a K6V star (M⋆ = 0 .74 M⊙) at 0.01 AU (L. M. Serrano et al. 2022; S. Giacalone et al. 2022). However, we perform a suite of simulations to test the robustness of the mechanism across a wide parameter range. To initialise evolutionary simulations of this planet we consider a range of poten-tial post-formation scenarios with hydrogen inventories 

Hocean = [1 , 5, 10 , 20] (in mass units of Earth’s oceanic hydrogen budget) and mantle redox states proxied by 

f O2 (∆IW = [0 , +2 , +4]). Given the uncertainties in the physics and rate of escape (J. E. Owen 2019; G. Gronoff et al. 2020; D. Kubyshkina et al. 2026), we vary the energy efficiency term η = [10 −2, 10 −3, 10 −4, 10 −5], and simultaneously explore a range of orbital semi-major axes a = [0 .1, 0.05 , 0.02 , 0.01]AU. Our parameter space allows exploration of the long-term evolution of a ultra-short period exoplanets (like TOI-500 b) spanning dif-ferent instellation and geochemical environments, es-cape regimes and chemical inventories. All of these pa-rameters factor into atmospheric evolution. We discuss the implications and limitations of these assumptions in Sect. 4.3.  

> 3.

RESULTS Figure 1 presents an ensemble of planetary evolu-tion pathways, plotting the bulk density ρbulk over time (normalised to its initial value in each case, ρbulk ,0) . The lines are colored based on whether reflation events emerge before complete atmospheric erosion (red), or if no reflation occurs and the planet either loses its atmo-sphere through monotonic atmospheric loss, and bulk density increase, or retains its secondary atmosphere for a minimum of 5 Gyr (blue), which is the observed age of TOI-500, our fiducial model system. The y-axis of Figure 1 is reversed such that a decrease in bulk density (i.e., atmosphere inflation) is shown as an upward spike. We categorize a simulation as ‘reflation’ in case it re-inflates to such a degree that it (again) reaches its initial bulk density some time after its initial deflation. The de-flation phase is largely driven by cooling post-formation (H. Nicholls et al. 2026; Y. Tang et al. 2024; R. Calder et al. 2025). Reflation events traverse density signatures from barely below the post-formation bulk density down to ∼40% of the initial density. Across our models, re-flation is found to occur at a range of planet ages, with the first events occurring shortly after planet formation and disk dissipation ( ∼ 100 Myr), while some cases as late as 5 Gyr, the TOI-500 system’s estimated current age (L. M. Serrano et al. 2022). The magnitude, timing, and likelihood to occur depend on formation conditions and interior geochemistry, which we now explore. To illustrate the mechanism behind these reflation events, we highlight two representative simulations from Figure 1. They represent the two principal outcomes of our simulations for these planets: a geochemically-reduced case where reflation occurs before complete at-mospheric erosion (denoted with R for Reflation), and 510 0 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 10 5 10 6 10 7 3 × 10 7 10 8 3 × 10 8 10 9 5 × 10 9  

> Time since planet formation, t(yr)
> 0.4
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> 1.1
> 1.2
> 1.3
> Normalised bulk density,  bulk  / bulk, 0
> Lower bulk
> density
> Higher transit
> radius
> Post-formation density

Reflation events 

> Deflation by cooling

Figure 1. Reflation events (red) occur across a range of ages and with different magnitudes across the evolution of irradiated super-Earths. The plot shows the normalised bulk density evolution of individual simulations, versus the time elapsed since planet formation. The red lines indicate cases where a reflation event occurs, while blue lines indicate those where it does not occur. The evolution tracks that end with a dot indicate the planet has reached an airless state and complete atmospheric erosion by hydrodynamic escape has taken place. The evolution of the two select cases for Figure 1 are highlighted and denoted with a R and D. These cases illustrate in more detail a representative reflation (red) and deflation case (blue). CO 2     

> SO 2
> SO 2
> H2S
> S2
> S2
> Reflation
> Deflation
> H2O
> Reflation
> Deflation
> Volume mixing ratio
> VMR (non-dim.)
> Time since planet formation (log 10 [yr])
> 3478910
> 10
> 10 0
> 10 -1
> 10 -2
> 10 -3
> 10 -4
> 10 -5
> 20
> 30
> 40
> Mean molar weight
> MMW (g/mol)
> H2
> H2
> CO

Figure 2. Evolution of atmospheric composition for the labelled reflation (solid lines) and deflation (dashed lines) cases from Figure 1 ( R and D). Top panel : evolution of the atmospheric mean molar weight. Bottom panel : the vol-ume mixing ratio (VMR) of the dominant molecules in the planets’ atmospheres. The reflation simulation loses its pri-mary atmospheric gas (CO, colored pink) through hydrody-namic escape. Until this point, the H molecules of the refla-tion case are dominantly dissolved as H 2O in the underlying magma ocean, and outgassed to the atmosphere as the CO– dominated envelope escapes to space. This transition from C- to H-dominated atmosphere re-inflates the atmosphere (through the decrease in MMW) and reduces the observed bulk density of the planet transiently by up to 60%. 

an oxidised case where the planet retains its atmo-sphere’s heavier composition indefinitely (denoted with 

D for Deflation). Figure 2 displays the chemical evolu-tion of the atmosphere of the two representative cases, showcasing the characteristic behaviour of atmospheric compounds in the reflating (solid line, R) or deflating (dashed lines, D) cases. The top panel plots the at-mospheric mean molecular weight (MMW) of the atmo-spheres over time, where the reflating planet’s MMW decreases strongly during the reflation event, while the MMW of the deflating case remains approximately con-stant throughout. This divergence is caused by the loss of the initial CO-dominated secondary atmosphere in the reducing case. R’s atmosphere is dominated by CO because outgassing at geochemical conditions compara-ble to the IW buffer favours CO production. In this stage, H is dominantly stored in the underlying magma ocean in the form of H 2O, and only a minor part of it is outgassed as gas in the atmosphere. R’s reflation event is taking place at around 3 × 10 8 yr, when the initial CO-dominated atmosphere is eroded to space by hydrodynamic escape. This decreases the surface pres-sure, which enables the outgassing of hydrogen, which splits into H 2 and H 2O according to solubility and gas phase chemistry at these conditions (P. A. Sossi et al. 60.0           

> 2.0
> 4.0
> Oxidation State fO2[IW ]
> 10 5
> 10 4
> 10 3
> 10 2
> Escape efficiency [non-dim]
> 0.0
> 2.0
> 4.0
> Oxidation State fO2[IW ]
> 0.01
> 0.02
> 0.05
> 0.1
> Semi-major axis [AU]
> 0.0
> 2.0
> 4.0
> Oxidation State fO2[IW ]
> 1.0
> 5.0
> 10.0
> 20.0
> Hydrogen Inventory [Earth oceans]
> 0.5
> 0.6
> 0.7
> 0.8
> 0.9
> 1.0
> min(  bulk / bulk, 0 )

Figure 3. Sensitivity of the reflation mechanism on mantle oxidation state, atmospheric escape efficiency, planetary semi-major axis, and initial hydrogen inventory. Reflation events occur most strongly at mantle oxidation state f O2 ∼ IW, escape efficiency 

η ∼ 10 −4 to 10 −3, semi-major axis a ≲ 0.05 au, and initial hydrogen inventories ≳ 5 Earth oceans. The sensitivity matrices display the minimum normalised bulk density that is achieved across three projections of the simulation ensemble. We show a range of redox states ( x-axis ) and respective simulation parameters ( y-axis ). For example, among all simulations with a mantle redox state of IW+0 and semi-major axis of 0.02 au in the middle panel (which includes all variability of escape efficiency and hydrogen inventory), the most reflated case reached an under-density of ρbulk 58% relative to its post-formation bulk density 

ρbulk ,0.

2023). Over the course of the loss of CO-dominated atmospheres this process transiently replaces the sec-ondary atmosphere with a lighter envelope where hy-drogen dominates. This is shown in the bottom panel of Figure 2. Accordingly, the MMW of the atmosphere de-creases and the scale height increases until the majority of the hydrogen is also eroded to space. In the final stage of the reflation event, the remaining S-dominated species degas to the atmosphere, which produces a turnover to-wards higher atmospheric MMWs. Sulfur-bearing gases are highly soluble under reducing conditions (F. Gail-lard et al. 2022), however, the strong decrease in to-tal atmospheric pressure releases them into the atmo-sphere (D. J. Bower et al. 2022). This release happens at ∼ 5 × 10 8 yr in the specific case of the R simulation, for which the reflation event lasts ∼200 Myr. During the course of the reflation event the melt fraction does not change substantially and remains at ≳ 90% throughout the reflation simulation and at 100 % throughout the de-flation simulation in Figure 2. In the reflation case, the mantle starts to crystallize once the atmosphere starts deflating after the peak of the reflation event. Figure 1 shows that these events have a wide range of onset times (from ∼ 10 7 yr to several ∼ 10 9yr ) and durations. Each duration is roughly on the same order of magnitude as the onset time after planet formation. In the oxidised scenario of Figure 2, the atmosphere transitions over time from a CO 2-dominated to a com-position that is becoming slightly enriched in H 2O, but survives for a substantially longer time. The MMW of the oxidised atmosphere is buffered by the continuous degassing of SO 2, which is soluble in the magma ocean at reduced conditions, but not at oxidized mantle redox state, and hence outgasses to the atmosphere through-out (O. Shorttle et al. 2024; H. Nicholls et al. 2026). All oxidised scenarios behave similarly, those with and without eventual complete atmospheric erosion, where the initially CO 2- and SO 2-dominated envelope becomes more enriched in H 2O over time. Critically, in all of these cases, the atmosphere remains enriched in heavy species that are dominated by oxygen, and hence the MMW of the atmosphere remains roughly constant, and no late re-inflation of the atmosphere takes place. Figure 3 presents a parameter study of the sensitiv-ity of reflation events on escape efficiency, semi-major axis, and initial hydrogen inventory of the super-Earths. Each colored square in Figure 3 displays the lowest value of the normalised bulk density (i.e., magnitude of refla-tion) at various mantle redox states, atmospheric escape efficiencies, orbital semi-major axes, and initial hydro-gen inventories from the explored simulation parameter space. The mantle oxidation state (as a proxy for inter-nal geochemistry) is the key controlling factor in regu-lating the occurrence and magnitude of reflation events. All dominant reflation peaks are observed in the left-most column of each Figure 3 panel, where the redox state is equal to the iron-w¨ ustite buffer. In general, any value of the minimum normalised bulk density achiev-ing ≤ 1.0 represents a parameter regime where reflation 7occurs for at least one scenario inflated above its post-formation bulk density. The leftmost panel of Figure 3 indicates that the strongest reflation is achieved at intermediate escape ef-ficiencies ( η = 10 −3 and 10 −4) because higher efficien-cies generate a moderate peak while mass loss processes become insignificant at lower efficiencies. At very high escape efficiencies the atmosphere is lost too rapidly. The central panel of Figure 3 shows that reflation events are sensitive to the instellation flux, where reflation is occurring most strongly for the innermost orbit of the most reduced cases. Reflation becomes significant below 

≈0.05 au and farther orbits lead to smaller to no dis-cernible reflation events. Finally, the rightmost panel of Figure 3 highlights the importance of the initial hydro-gen inventory in fuelling reflation events. Planets with more hydrogen available in their atmosphere and man-tle spend more time in the reflation phase before the atmospheric erosion causes the atmosphere to deflate. This means that a minimum initial inventory of hydro-gen must be present from planet formation. Reflation is significant above a hydrogen budget greater than 5 Earth ocean equivalents. For reference, the combined H budget of the Earth’s mantle plus atmosphere is ∼2-10 Earth oceans (A. H. Peslier et al. 2017).  

> 4.

DISCUSSION 4.1. Reflation as observable signature of interior geochemistry 

The reflation mechanism demonstrated through our simulations suggests a direct and potentially observ-able link between a rocky planet’s interior geochemistry, volatile budget, and the time evolution of its observed transit radius and bulk density. In conventional models of atmospheric escape, mass loss monotonically strips the envelope and increases the bulk density over time (J. E. Owen & Y. Wu 2017; A. Gupta & H. E. Schlicht-ing 2019; J. G. Rogers 2025). Reflation breaks this monotonic trend by incorporating the effects of mantle degassing. For reduced scenarios, escape-driven deple-tion of the initially CO-dominated atmospheres is coun-teracted by outgassing of progressively lighter species (H 2O, H 2) from the melt, because they are more soluble (C. Dorn & T. Lichtenberg 2021; D. J. Bower et al. 2022; P. A. Sossi et al. 2023; T.-A. Suer et al. 2023). Later-stage outgassing of lighter species lowers the MMW and transiently inflates the atmosphere, even as total volatile mass decreases. Non-monotonic density evolution as a direct result from interior-atmosphere feedback is a qual-itatively novel prediction that cannot arise in models treating atmospheric composition as fixed or neglect-ing the interior volatile reservoir (T. Lichtenberg & Y. Miguel 2025). The physical origin of reflation lies in the redox-dependent competition between volatile solubility and outgassing speciation. At low oxygen fugacity (near the iron–w¨ ustite buffer), carbon is outgassed primarily as CO ( μ ≈ 28 g mol −1), which dominates the initial at-mospheric mass. All S compounds remain dissolved in the magma ocean at these redox conditions (F. Gaillard et al. 2022; T.-A. Suer et al. 2023). Hydrogen is stored in the melt as dissolved H 2O; as escape strips the CO-rich atmosphere, the decreasing surface pressure shifts the solubility equilibrium, degassing this water into the gas phase. Once in the atmosphere, equilibrium chem-istry at the prevailing reduced conditions converts much of the H 2O into H 2 (μ ≈ 2 g mol −1) (P. A. Sossi et al. 2023; M. A. Thompson et al. 2025), progressively replac-ing heavy carbon-bearing species with light hydrogen-bearing ones. The resulting compositional shift lowers the MMW and inflates the scale height. In the final phase of a reflation event, the declining pressure at the surface also degasses sulfur species, such that the last at-mosphere before complete desiccation is S-rich. In con-trast, oxidized mantles initially outgas a CO 2-dominated atmosphere ( μ ≈ 44 g mol −1), including contributions from CO ( μ ≈ 28 g mol −1) and SO 2 (μ ≈ 64 g mol −1), which increases the MMW, decreases the scale height, and stabilises the atmosphere against efficient hydrody-namic loss. H2O in the oxidised case is degassed only much later as the surface pressure drops further. Be-cause these oxidised gases are heavy, their delayed tran-sition does not produce a comparable MMW decrease, and the atmosphere deflates monotonically. This redox sensitivity, accessible via existing planetary-evolution models, makes reflation a possible observational signature of the mantle geochemistry oc-curring within super-Earth exoplanets. Sub-Neptunes and larger planets retain thick primary envelopes of H2/He, whose low MMW already dominates the atmo-spheric scale height; any secondary outgassing signal is diluted by the primordial gas, and the stronger surface gravity suppresses the relative change in scale height from compositional shifts. Reflation requires that a secondary, outgassed atmosphere constitutes the bulk of the envelope, so redox-driven changes in speciation can materially alter the MMW. This confines the refla-tion mechanism to super-Earths that have already lost (or never accreted) a significant primary atmosphere, yet still host a molten, volatile-bearing interior. The indications of heat-redistribution signatures on highly irradiated super-Earths (S. Zieba et al. 2022; R. Hu et al. 2024; P. C. August et al. 2025; C. Monaghan et al. 82025; J. K. Teske et al. 2025; B. Park Coy et al. 2026) increasingly favour the existence of such types of heavy secondary atmospheres. Measurements of low bulk den-sities (i.e., an anomalously extended atmosphere) on highly irradiated super-Earths, inconsistent with bare-rock or monotonic-stripping scenarios, would point to an actively degassing, geochemically-reduced interior. The magnitude, timing, and duration of reflation depend on the oxygen fugacity, irradiation environment, ini-tial volatile endowment, and escape efficiency (Sect. 3). Simultaneous constraints on density and atmospheric composition from transit and emission spectroscopy could, in principle, narrow the range of plausible interior redox states (Sect. 4.4). The search and identification of low-density reflated super-Earth planets presents a valuable opportunity for precisely probing exoplanetary subsurface geochemistry through atmospheric markers. Deep characterisation of mantle redox complements the existing approach of bulk-density constraints, which are otherwise degenerate between composition and thermal state (S. Seager et al. 2007; L. A. Rogers & S. Seager 2010; L. Zeng et al. 2016; C. Dorn & T. Lichtenberg 2021; I. D. Boer et al. 2025). 4.2. Dependence on primary parameters 

Reflation events are observed only in a subset of our simulations. Event occurrence depends most critically on a planet’s mantle redox state, while reflation magni-tude varies according to a planet’s initial volatile inven-tory, instellation, and escape efficiency. The strongest peak is observed for a reduced case (where reduced refers to an oxidation state of ∆IW = 0) with a high hydrogen content ( Hocean = 20), a closer-in orbit ( a = 0 .01 AU), and a low escape efficiency ( η = 10 −4). As shown in Figure 3, the reflation mechanism is most pronounced for simulations falling in the reduced region of the in-vestigated parameter space, corresponding to oxygen fu-gacities f O2 between ∆IW ±0 and ∆IW+2. Within this regime, the atmosphere is initially CO dominated, which enables the reflation mechanism as discussed above, In contrast, planets with more oxidized interiors (∆IW ≳

+2) do not exhibit significant inflation regardless of es-cape efficiency, orbital distance, or initial hydrogen in-ventory. For these oxidized mantles, the outgassed com-position remains dominated by heavy molecules (mainly CO 2) throughout the evolution, and the small changes in mean molecular weight are insufficient to counter-balance the mass loss. The resulting atmospheric evolu-tion is monotonic deflation, with bulk density increasing steadily over time. Beyond redox state, other parameters modulate the timing and magnitude of reflation. Higher initial hydro-gen inventories provide a larger reservoir of hydrogen-rich volatiles that can sustain the late-stage outgassing of H 2O and H 2, both by directly contributing water and by enabling more vigorous melt production through lower solidus temperatures. Furthermore, the higher hydrogen content leads to stronger peaks as the atmo-sphere continues inflating, and thus increasing its FXUV 

absorbing radius, as long as it has enough hydrogen to drive this effect. More efficient escape ( η closer to unity) accelerates the removal of the initial CO-rich atmosphere, hastening the transition to the hydrogen-dominated outgassing regime. Shorter orbital distances increase the incident XUV flux and thus the escape rate, which similarly speeds up the compositional shift. The interplay between these parameters defines a finite window in parameter space where reflation occurs: the planet must have enough hydrogen to supply the later outgassing phase, sufficient escape to remove the initial heavy atmosphere but not too efficient as to lose most of its hydrogen content too fast impeding the atmospheric reflation, and a redox state that allows the outgassed composition to change substantially over the course of the evolution. Candidate targets that appear to fall within, or near, this parameter space by having close-in orbits and ap-pearing to be under-dense, indicative of significant hy-drogen inventories, are already known in the literature. See for example the Kepler-11 system (J. J. Lissauer et al. 2013; M. Ikoma & Y. Hori 2012) where follow-up modeling quantified radius inflation due to H/He (A. Wolfgang & E. Lopez 2015); Kepler-51 system (K. Ma-suda 2014; J. E. Libby-Roberts et al. 2020; K. Masuda et al. 2024); GJ 1214b (D. Charbonneau et al. 2009; E. M.-R. Kempton et al. 2023); 55 Cancri e (R. Hu et al. 2024); and TOI-561b (J. K. Teske et al. 2025). We pro-pose such targets as promising candidates according to our theoretical analysis. 4.3. Uncertainties and limitations 

PROTEUS incorporates the key physical and chem-ical interactions linking planetary interiors and atmo-spheres. However, as with any model, the model in-corporates substantial approximations, which may merit special attention in future work. In this section we dis-cuss the major uncertainties and model-specific consid-erations that may affect the reflation mechanism. An important consideration, in the context of the re-flation effect, is that our atmospheres are treated with vertically well-mixed chemical compositions determined at the surface by their partial pressures from the out-gassing calculation. In reality, the combined effects of thermochemistry and various disequilibrium processes 9(e.g. photochemistry and diffusion kinetics) will mod-ulate gas mixing ratios and influence the transport of radiation through the atmosphere (R. Hu et al. 2012, 2013; N. Madhusudhan et al. 2016; H. Nicholls et al. 2023; A. Werlen et al. 2025). However, chemical repro-cessing of atoms into various gas-phase species will only negligibly impact the atmospheric height structure (and thus, the bulk planet density) because the atmospheric mean molecular weight is largely a function of atmo-spheric elemental mixing ratios. Similarly, we treat the escaping outflow’s elemental composition as equivalent to that degassed equilibrium at the surface. Elemen-tal inhomogeneity may be induced by cold-trapping in colder environments than considered here (N. Habib & R. T. Pierrehumbert 2024; R. T. Pierrehumbert 2010) or by de-mixing by chemical immiscibility, which is ap-plicable to the sub-Neptune and gas giant regimes (C. Piaulet-Ghorayeb et al. 2025; A. Gupta et al. 2025; J. G. Rogers et al. 2025). A related uncertainty concerns the choice of escape efficiency η. The canonical value of ∼ 10% commonly adopted in energy-limited mass-loss calculations origi-nates largely from studies of hot Jupiters and H 2/He-dominated primary envelopes (e.g., R. A. Murray-Clay et al. 2009), where stellar photons couple efficiently into a deeply extended, low MMW atmosphere. Radiation-hydrodynamic (RHD) simulations of water-rich atmo-spheres on rocky planets (J. E. Owen & M. A. Alvarez 2016), as applied to the TRAPPIST-1 system by E. Bolmont et al. (2017), indicate instead that η is not constant but depends sensitively on the incident XUV flux, spanning ∼10 −3 to ∼10 −1, with the lowest values reached at the high XUV luminosities characteristic of young, close-in systems. This decrease with increasing flux reflects the fact that Ly α and molecular line cooling divert a growing fraction of the absorbed energy from mechanical work on the gas (R. A. Murray-Clay et al. 2009; J. E. Owen & M. A. Alvarez 2016). Our adopted 

η values, which are held constant throughout simula-tions, fall within the physically motivated range for high XUV regimes where line cooling is also taken into con-sideration as further suppressing escape (A. Nakayama et al. 2022; T. Yoshida et al. 2024; R. D. Chatterjee & R. T. Pierrehumbert 2026) These η values are thus justifiably lower than those typically assumed for gas-rich envelopes. For the high MMW, CO/CO 2-rich sec-ondary atmospheres central to the reflation mechanism, no dedicated RHD simulations quantifying escape effi-ciency currently exist, to the best of our knowledge. The compressed scale height, smaller XUV-absorbing cross-section, and more efficient infrared cooling by poly-atomic molecules (R. Wordsworth et al. 2024) likely push η even lower than the E. Bolmont et al. (2017) range, though the exact values remain unknown. Com-parable conclusions have recently been reached by T. Yoshida et al. (2024); T. Yoshida & E. Gaidos (2025); X. Ji et al. (2025); R. D. Chatterjee & R. T. Pierrehumbert (2026). Importantly, lower efficiencies do not suppress reflation but extend its characteristic timescales, which would broaden the observational window for detecting transient underdensities on young super-Earths. We treat the escaping outflow as compositionally unfractionating, and assess the validity of this as-sumption by comparing our energy-limited mass flux 

f = ηF XUV /(4 Vpot ) to the critical crossover flux fc =

b x 1 (m2 − m1)/H 1. Above this crossover flux, heavy species are dragged along with the escaping gas in the bulk, in a non-fractionating regime (D. M. Hunten et al. 1987). We evaluate this following the implementations of C. Cherubim et al. (2024) and R. D. Wordsworth et al. (2018), adopting parameters representative of our simulations together with binary diffusion coefficients from R. D. Wordsworth et al. (2018). We find that for an inflated H 2-dominated atmosphere during the XUV-saturated stellar phase, at a ≲ 0.05 au and η ≳ 10 −4,the escape flux exceeds the critical flux by one to three orders of magnitude ( f /f c ∼ 2 to 760). Our assump-tion of unfractionating escape is strongly supported in this regime. Diffusive fractionation ( f ≤ fc) is in-stead confined to the weak-escape regime of our pa-rameter space (low efficiency, wide orbits, and the post-saturation XUV phase), where mass loss is slow and re-flation is correspondingly weak or absent (Fig. 3). The crossover formalism applies generally to any light major constituent dragging a heavy species (R. D. Wordsworth et al. 2018), we evaluated it here for the H 2-dominated inflated phase in reflation events. Photochemistry will dissociate the dominant carbon species (CO, and later CO 2) in the upper atmosphere, so the relevant question is not whether carbon and oxygen escape as molecules or as atoms, but whether the escape flux exceeds the crossover flux for the masses involved (a species-resolved problem addressed by multispecies hydrodynamic es-cape models as M. Schulik & R. A. Booth 2023). In the vigorous-escape regime that drives reflation the flux lies one to three orders of magnitude above crossover, plac-ing the crossover mass above that of CO (28 g/mol) and hence well above the atomic masses of carbon (12 g/mol) and oxygen (16 g/mol). Because the photodissociation products are lighter than their parent molecules, they re-main entrained in the bulk outflow wherever the parent molecules are, and over a strictly larger region of param-eter space. Dissociation therefore relaxes the crossover condition rather than tightening it. Elemental separa-10 tion of carbon and oxygen becomes possible only in the weak-escape corner of our parameter space (wide or-bits, low efficiency, and the post-saturation XUV phase), where the crossover mass drops below 16 g/mol, but there mass loss is slow and reflation is itself weak or ab-sent (Fig. 3), consistent with the transition from bulk-dragged to diffusively fractionating escape found in hy-drodynamic simulations by M. Schulik & J. E. Owen (2025). Crucially, the reflation signature originates from the interior-atmosphere partitioning of preferentially-dissolved H2O and its conversion to H2 as the sur-face pressure decreases, rather than from escape pref-erentially retaining hydrogen. Upper-atmosphere frac-tionation would therefore modulate the magnitude and timing of reflation rather than suppress the mecha-nism itself, consistent with the conceptual scope of this study. A more self-consistent treatment requires cou-pling diffusive fractionation directly into the volatile speciation–solubility solver, enabled by various trans-port processes through the atmosphere. This mech-anism is addressed by current open-source fractiona-tion codes (e.g., IsoFATE coupled to the magma ocean speciation solver Atmodeller C. Cherubim et al. 2025; D. J. Bower et al. 2025), applicable to the high-MMW, magma-ocean-coupled regime. Incorporating this effect in our simulations would likely affect the magnitude of reflation, without erasing it. Quantifying its effect is left for future work. Interior-atmosphere partitioning calculations have largely assumed that volatiles dissolved within ascend-ing parcels of silicate melt become saturated near the magma ocean surface, such that chemical reprocessing conditions are representative of bubble exsolution condi-tions (L. Schaefer & L. T. Elkins-Tanton 2018; T. Licht-enberg et al. 2023; A. Salvador et al. 2023). Labora-tory and numerical studies suggest that magma ocean degassing processes do not necessarily occur at equilib-rium (A. Walbecq et al. 2025), subject to turbulent fluid dynamics and bubble formation microphysics (L. Pioli et al. 2012; R. Dasgupta 2013; J. E. Gardner et al. 2023; A. Salvador & H. Samuel 2023). Additionally, hydro-gen may partition into the solidified deep mantle via entrained magma pockets (S. Hier-Majumder & M. M. Hirschmann 2017; S. J. Sim et al. 2024). Disequilibrium outgassing and inhomogeneous chemical stratification of volatiles throughout the deep mantle both allow greater volatile storage capacities; effectively degenerate with the range of initial volatile inventories and escape effi-ciencies considered here (H. Nicholls et al. 2026). We have adopted a range of potential f O2 offsets relative to the iron–w¨ ustite buffer, which are held fixed during each simulation. Our approach intuitively parametrises multiple geodynamic and geochemical pro-cesses that collectively determine the redox state and oxygen fugacity throughout the mantle of Earth (D. J. Frost & C. A. McCammon 2008; E. Cottrell et al. 2025) and super-Earth exoplanets (R. Wordsworth & L. Krei-dberg 2022; T. Lichtenberg & Y. Miguel 2025; T. Licht-enberg et al. 2025a); e.g., core segregation, the rainout of metal droplets from the mantle, and phase stabilisa-tion by electron spin alignment (T. Lichtenberg et al. 2023; T. Lichtenberg & Y. Miguel 2025; L. Zhang et al. 2014). We emphasise that the mantle oxygen fugacity 

f O2 offset relative to the IW buffer is held fixed through-out each simulation (H. S. C. O’Neill & S. M. Eggins 2002), so the reflation events identified here reflect the planet’s instantaneous geochemical state rather than a self-consistently evolving redox history. A shift towards more oxidised mantles at peak hydrogen loss would push an initially reducing mantle towards a more oxidised state (J. F. Kasting et al. 1993; N. Katyal et al. 2020), however reflation is contingent on the planet residing in a sufficiently reduced state ( f O2 ≲ ∆IW +2) at the mo-ment its initial CO-dominated atmosphere is stripped. Provided this condition is met within the relevant evo-lutionary window, the qualitative compositional transi-tion that drives reflation is preserved. A self-consistent treatment of mantle redox evolution would thus refine the time and magnitude of the onsets (Figure 1) and the quantitative boundaries of the reflation regime (Figure 3), without removing the mechanism itself. Dissolved volatiles further complicate the geochemistry by directly exchanging electrons with mantle phases to additionally modulate the redox state. Although subject to these empirical and conceptual uncertainties, prior theoreti-cal studies have suggested that hydrogen escape could 

oxidise mantle chemistry over time (D. C. Catling et al. 2001; R. Wordsworth & R. Pierrehumbert 2014; M. M. Hirschmann 2023; C. Cherubim et al. 2025). Finally, each of our simulations adopt a planetary in-terior structure solution which is held fixed over time. This neglects the impact of deep mantle solidification on the density of these layers, but is largely negligi-ble here because our simulations remain in the (semi-)molten regime (A. S. Wolf & D. J. Bower 2018; K. M. Boley et al. 2023). Similarly, the atmosphere’s mass would marginally compress the mantle-building material (K. Hirose et al. 2021). Future avenues of research may consider the reflation effect in the sub-Neptune regime, where these structural considerations become important (C. T. Unterborn et al. 2023; C. Dorn et al. 2015). 11 4.4. Opportunities for observability 

The concept of reflation highlighted here illustrates the importance of transient evolutionary processes in shaping the observed population of exoplanets. When observable, such processes can be used as probes for at-mospheric evolution and calibrate our picture of plane-tary formation. Reflation events would leave observable imprints on bulk properties, such as radius and den-sity, with observable drops between few percent to over 60% compared to standard evolutionary models. Fur-ther, the compositional shift in the atmospheric com-position that drives this phenomenon would also be ob-servable to spectroscopic observations through its effect on redox-sensitive species in the atmosphere (Fig. 2). These properties are encoded in current exoplanet ob-servations, subtly influencing the structure of the radius valley (B. J. Fulton et al. 2017; R. Cloutier & K. Menou 2020) as observed with Kepler, TESS, and the upcom-ing PLATO mission. In particular, reflation could man-ifest as an excess population of puffy super-Earths rela-tive to predictions from standard thermal evolution and photoevaporation models which neglect compositional changes (e.g. Y. Tang et al. 2024; C. Cherubim et al. 2024). Obtaining comprehensive characterisations on outlier objects that cannot be explained by standard evolu-tion models (i.e., their age, radius, mass, and atmo-spheric composition) would provide avenues for verifying whether reflation occurs or not. The most promising tar-gets for detecting reflation are super-Earth mass planets with relatively low densities, and moderate to high ir-radiation levels; particularly those orbiting stars with well-determined ages. Such planets, near the radius val-ley, and around older systems are of particular interest, as reflation is predicted to occur after significant atmo-spheric evolution has already taken place. Interpreting individual cases remains challenging due to degeneracies between formation history, atmospheric escape, and internal processes. Ultimately, the more powerful approach to use transient probes of plane-tary evolution is to search for population-level trends. The expected synergies from the upcoming PLATO (H. Rauer et al. 2025) and Ariel (G. Tinetti et al. 2022) missions will play a key role, providing a statistically significant sample of atmospheres with homogeneous at-mospheric constraints. By correlating atmospheric com-position (and inferred mean molecular weight) with bulk properties such as radius, density, irradiation, and stel-lar age, it might be possible to identify systematic de-viations from standard evolutionary models. In partic-ular, population-level trends linking atmospheric com-position to position relative to the radius valley would         

> Figure 4. Qualitative illustration of the reflation mech-anism, comparing the standard atmospheric evolution ob-served in oxidised atmospheres (top) and reflation events
> (bottom) observed in reduced atmospheres. Oxidised su-per-Earths would experience monotonic deflation as their secondary atmospheres are heavy, while reduced interiors favour transient reflation events, arising from the transi-tion from a carbon-rich CO-dominated atmosphere, to an H2-dominated atmosphere by outgassing from the interior.

provide strong indirect evidence for reflation. Such sta-tistical approaches can also help overcome the limita-tions of individual-object studies and offer a more robust pathway to disentangling the many relevant evolution-ary processes.  

> 5.

CONCLUSIONS Using coupled interior–atmosphere evolution simula-tions we demonstrate that the feedback between hy-drodynamic escape and redox-controlled outgassing can produce transient re-inflation events of evolved super-Earth atmospheres, a mechanism we term reflation (il-lustrative sketch in Figure 4). We consider irradiated rocky planet scenarios spanning diverse physical regimes of mantle redox state, initial volatile inventory, escape efficiency, and orbital distance. From these, we iden-tify the conditions under which non-monotonic density evolutionary behaviours arise, and characterise their po-tentially observable fingerprint. Our conclusions are as follows: 1. Geochemically-reduced mantles (near the iron– w¨ ustite buffer) initially outgas CO-dominated at-mospheres while hydrogen-bearing species are ini-tially dissolved. However, hydrodynamic escape strips outgassed species, so the atmosphere be-comes increasingly hydrogen-dominated and low-ers the atmospheric MMW, inflating the atmo-spheric scale height, and transiently reducing bulk planet densities by up to ∼ 60%. 12 2. Oxidized Earth-similar mantles do not generate reflation events. Their atmospheres remain domi-nated by heavy species (mainly CO 2 and SO 2), so escape leads to monotonic deflation without a sig-nificant compositional shift. Such compact atmo-spheres can be resilient toward total erosion and may survive over Gyrs. 3. Reflation is favored when escape acts with inter-mediate efficiencies, at high irradiations, and for initial hydrogen inventories exceeding ∼ 5 Earth oceans. Negligible escape will fail to remove the initial heavy atmosphere, while substantial escape strips volatiles entirely before the compositional transition can inflate the atmosphere. 4. Reflation is confined to the super-Earth regime: planets whose observed compositions are sec-ondary, rather than of nebular H 2/He in origin. Reflation offers a direct observational connection between atmospheric properties and interior geo-chemistry, breaking the degeneracy between com-position and thermal state in bulk density mea-surements. 5. Population-level surveys correlating atmospheric composition, bulk density, irradiation, and stellar age (e.g., as synergy between PLATO and Ariel) represent the most promising pathway to detecting reflated super-Earths – thereby constraining deep mantle redox states across the exoplanet popula-tion. The reflation mechanism suggests that atmospheric evolution on rocky exoplanets need not be a one-way street toward stripping. The geochemical and formation history of a planet’s interior can, under these identifiable conditions, be written into its atmosphere: an imprint that the next generation of observatories is poised to read. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We offer our thanks to the anonymous referee, whose review helped to strengthen our article. We are grate-ful to Emma Postolec for insightful discussions about atmospheric escape. This research was supported by the Branco Weiss Foundation, the European Research Council (ERC) under the European Union’s Horizon Europe research and innovation programme (Magma-Worlds, 101219807), the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation (AEThER, G-2025-25284), NASA’s Nexus for Exo-planet System Science research coordination network (Alien Earths, 80NSSC21K0593), and the NWO NWA-ORC PRELIFE Consortium (NWA.1630.23.013). MA is supported by the Swiss National Science Foundation through the Postdoc.Mobility fellowship, grant number 230229. HN acknowledges support from STFC grant UKRI1184. We thank the Center for Information Tech-nology of the University of Groningen for their support and for providing access to the H´ abr´ ok high performance computing cluster. REFERENCES 

> Abe, Y., & Matsui, T. 1986, J. Geophys. Res., 91, E291, doi: 10.1029/JB091iB13p0E291 Ardia, P., Hirschmann, M. M., Withers, A. C., & Stanley, B. D. 2013, GeoCoA, 114, 52, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2013.03.028 Armstrong, L. S., Hirschmann, M. M., Stanley, B. D., Falksen, E. G., & Jacobsen, S. D. 2015, GeoCoA, 171, 283, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2015.07.007 Attia, M., Bourrier, V., Bolmont, E., et al. 2025, A&A, 702, A132, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202555239 August, P. C., Buchhave, L. A., Diamond-Lowe, H., et al. 2025, A&A, 695, A171, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202452611 Bean, J. L., Raymond, S. N., & Owen, J. E. 2021, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 126, e06639, doi: 10.1029/2020JE006639 Boer, I. D., Nicholls, H., & Lichtenberg, T. 2025, ApJ, 987, 172, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/add69f Boley, K. M., Panero, W. R., Unterborn, C. T., et al. 2023, ApJ, 954, 202, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acea85 Bolmont, E., Selsis, F., Owen, J. E., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 3728, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2578 Bower, D. J., Hakim, K., Sossi, P. A., & Sanan, P. 2022, PSJ, 3, 93, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac5fb1 Bower, D. J., Kitzmann, D., Wolf, A. S., et al. 2019, A&A, 631, A103, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/20193571010.31223/osf.io/ctqe3 Bower, D. J., Sanan, P., & Wolf, A. S. 2018, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 274, 49, doi: 10.1016/j.pepi.2017.11.004 Bower, D. J., Thompson, M. A., Hakim, K., Tian, M., & Sossi, P. A. 2025, ApJ, 995, 59, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae1479 Brun, A. S., & Browning, M. K. 2017, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 14, 4, doi: 10.1007/s41116-017-0007-8

13 

Calder, R., Shorttle, O., Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., & Guimond, C.-M. 2025, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.05816 Catling, D. C., Zahnle, K. J., & McKay, C. P. 2001, Science, 293, 839, doi: 10.1126/science.1061976 Charbonneau, D., Berta, Z. K., Irwin, J., et al. 2009, Nature, 462, 891, doi: 10.1038/nature08679 Chase, M. W. 1986, JANAF thermochemical tables Chatterjee, R. D., & Pierrehumbert, R. T. 2026, ApJ, 998, 236, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae2ffa Cherubim, C., Wordsworth, R., Bower, D. J., et al. 2025, ApJ, 983, 97, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adbca9 Cherubim, C., Wordsworth, R., Hu, R., & Shkolnik, E. 2024, ApJ, 967, 139, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3e77 Cloutier, R., & Menou, K. 2020, AJ, 159, 211, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab8237 Cmiel, J., Wordsworth, R., & Seeley, J. T. 2025, PSJ, 6, 123, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/adcd5f Cottrell, E., Canil, D., Langmuir, C., Evans, K. A., & Gaillard, F. 2025, Nature Reviews Earth and Environment, 6, 728, doi: 10.1038/s43017-025-00735-1 Dasgupta, R. 2013, Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 75, 183, doi: 10.2138/rmg.2013.75.7 Dasgupta, R., Falksen, E., Pal, A., & Sun, C. 2022, GeoCoA, 336, 291, doi: 10.1016/j.gca.2022.09.012 Dixon, J. E. 1997, American Mineralogist, 82, 368, doi: 10.2138/am-1997-3-415 Dorn, C., Khan, A., Heng, K., et al. 2015, A&A, 577, A83, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201424915 Dorn, C., & Lichtenberg, T. 2021, ApJL, 922, L4, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac33af Edwards, J. M., & Slingo, A. 1996, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 122, 689, doi: 10.1002/qj.49712253107 Elkins-Tanton, L. T. 2008, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 271, 181, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2008.03.062 Frost, B. R. 2018, in Oxide Minerals (Boston, MA, USA: De Gruyter), 1–10. https://www.degruyterbrill.com/ document/doi/10.1515/9781501508684-004/html Frost, D. J., & McCammon, C. A. 2008, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 36, 389, doi: 10.1146/annurev.earth.36.031207.124322 Fulton, B. J., & Petigura, E. A. 2018, AJ, 156, 264, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aae828 Fulton, B. J., Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., et al. 2017, AJ, 154, 109, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa80eb Gaillard, F., Bouhifd, M. A., F¨ uri, E., et al. 2021, SSRv, 217, 22, doi: 10.1007/s11214-021-00802-1 Gaillard, F., Bernadou, F., Roskosz, M., et al. 2022, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 577, 117255, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2021.117255 Gardner, J. E., Wadsworth, F. B., Carley, T. L., et al. 2023, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 51, 131, doi: 10.1146/annurev-earth-031621-080308 Giacalone, S., Dressing, C. D., Hedges, C., et al. 2022, AJ, 163, 99, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac4334 Greene, T. P., Bell, T. J., Ducrot, E., et al. 2023, Nature, 618, 39, doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-05951-7 Gronoff, G., Arras, P., Baraka, S., et al. 2020, Journal of Geophysical Research (Space Physics), 125, e27639, doi: 10.1029/2019JA027639 Guillot, T. 2010, A&A, 520, A27, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200913396 Gupta, A., & Schlichting, H. E. 2019, MNRAS, 487, 24, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1230 Gupta, A., Stixrude, L., & Schlichting, H. E. 2025, ApJL, 982, L35, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adb631 Habib, N., & Pierrehumbert, R. T. 2024, ApJ, 961, 35, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad04e2 Hier-Majumder, S., & Hirschmann, M. M. 2017, Geochemistry, Geophysics, Geosystems, 18, 3078, doi: 10.1002/2017GC006937 Hirose, K., Wood, B., & Voˇ cadlo, L. 2021, Nature Reviews Earth and Environment, 2, 645, doi: 10.1038/s43017-021-00203-6 Hirschmann, M. M. 2023, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 619, 118311, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2023.118311 H¨ ogstr¨ om, U. 1988, Boundary-Layer Meteorology, 42, 55, doi: 10.1007/BF00119875 Hu, R., Gaillard, F., & Kite, E. S. 2023, ApJL, 948, L20, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/acd0b4 Hu, R., Seager, S., & Bains, W. 2012, ApJ, 761, 166, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/761/2/166 Hu, R., Seager, S., & Bains, W. 2013, ApJ, 769, 6, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/769/1/6 Hu, R., Bello-Arufe, A., Zhang, M., et al. 2024, Nature, 630, 609, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07432-x Hu, R., Bello-Arufe, A., Zhang, M., et al. 2024, Nature, 630, 609, doi: 10.1038/s41586-024-07432-x Hunten, D. M., Pepin, R. O., & Walker, J. C. G. 1987, Icarus, 69, 532, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(87)90022-4 Ikoma, M., & Hori, Y. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 753, 66, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/753/1/66 Jackson, A. P., Davis, T. A., & Wheatley, P. J. 2012, MNRAS, 422, 2024, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20657.x Janssen, L. J., Miguel, Y., Min, M., et al. 2026, MNRAS, 546, stag180, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag180 14 

Ji, X., Chatterjee, R. D., Coy, B. P., & Kite, E. 2025, ApJ, 992, 198, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adfe69 Johnstone, C. P., Bartel, M., & G¨ udel, M. 2021, A&A, 649, A96, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038407 Joyce, M., & Tayar, J. 2023, Galaxies, 11, 75, doi: 10.3390/galaxies11030075 Kasting, J. F., Eggler, D. H., & Raeburn, S. P. 1993, The Journal of Geology, 101, 245, doi: 10.1086/648219 Katyal, N., Ortenzi, G., Grenfell, J. L., et al. 2020, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 643, A81, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038779 Kempton, E. M.-R., & Knutson, H. A. 2024, Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry, 90, 411, doi: 10.2138/rmg.2024.90.12 Kempton, E. M.-R., Zhang, M., Bean, J. L., et al. 2023, Nature, 620, 67, doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06159-5 Krissansen-Totton, J., Wogan, N., Thompson, M., & Fortney, J. J. 2024, Nature Communications, 15, 8374, doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-52642-6 Kubyshkina, D., Way, M. J., Dandouras, I., et al. 2026, SSRv, 222, 28, doi: 10.1007/s11214-026-01283-w Lacis, A. A., & Oinas, V. 1991, J. Geophys. Res., 96, 9027, doi: 10.1029/90JD01945 Lammer, H., Selsis, F., Ribas, I., et al. 2003, ApJL, 598, L121, doi: 10.1086/380815 Lehmer, O. R., & Catling, D. C. 2017, ApJ, 845, 130, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa8137 Libby-Roberts, J. E., Berta-Thompson, Z. K., D´ esert, J.-M., et al. 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 159, 57, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab5d36 Lichtenberg, T. 2021, ApJL, 914, L4, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ac0146 Lichtenberg, T., Bower, D. J., Hammond, M., et al. 2021, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 126, e06711, doi: 10.1029/2020JE006711 Lichtenberg, T., & Miguel, Y. 2025, Treatise on Geochemistry, 7, 51, doi: 10.1016/B978-0-323-99762-1.00122-4 Lichtenberg, T., Schaefer, L. K., Nakajima, M., & Fischer, R. A. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 907, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.10023 Lichtenberg, T., Shorttle, O., Teske, J., & Kempton, E. M.-R. 2025a, Science, 390, eads3660, doi: 10.1126/science.ads3360 Lichtenberg, T., Schaefer, L., Krissansen-Totton, J., et al. 2025b, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2511.16142, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2511.16142 Lissauer, J. J., Jontof-Hutter, D., Rowe, J. F., et al. 2013, The Astrophysical Journal, 770, 131, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/770/2/131 Lopez, E. D., & Fortney, J. J. 2014, ApJ, 792, 1, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/792/1/1 Luque, R., & Pall´ e, E. 2022, Science, 377, 1211, doi: 10.1126/science.abl7164 Madhusudhan, N., Ag´ undez, M., Moses, J. I., & Hu, Y. 2016, SSRv, 205, 285, doi: 10.1007/s11214-016-0254-3 Manners, J. 2024, in American Institute of Physics Conference Series, Vol. 2988, American Institute of Physics Conference Series (AIP), 030002, doi: 10.1063/5.0185476 Marley, M. S., & Robinson, T. D. 2015, ARA&A, 53, 279, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-082214-122522 Masuda, K. 2014, The Astrophysical Journal, 783, 53, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/783/1/53 Masuda, K., Libby-Roberts, J. E., Livingston, J. H., et al. 2024, The Astronomical Journal, 168, 294, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad83d3 Monaghan, C., Roy, P.-A., Benneke, B., et al. 2025, AJ, 169, 239, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adbe75 Murray-Clay, R. A., Chiang, E. I., & Murray, N. 2009, ApJ, 693, 23, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/693/1/23 Nakayama, A., Ikoma, M., & Terada, N. 2022, Astrophys. J., 937, 72, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac86ca Nicholls, H., H´ ebrard, E., Venot, O., Drummond, B., & Evans, E. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 5681, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1734 Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., Bower, D. J., & Pierrehumbert, R. 2024, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 129, 2024JE008576, doi: 10.1029/2024JE008576 Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., Chatterjee, R. D., et al. 2026, Nature Astronomy, doi: 10.1038/s41550-026-02815-8 Nicholls, H., Pierrehumbert, R., & Lichtenberg, T. 2025a, The Journal of Open Source Software, 10, 7726, doi: 10.21105/joss.07726 Nicholls, H., Pierrehumbert, R. T., Lichtenberg, T., Soucasse, L., & Smeets, S. 2025b, MNRAS, 536, 2957, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2772 O’Neill, H. S. C., & Eggins, S. M. 2002, Chemical Geology, 186, 151, doi: 10.1016/S0009-2541(01)00414-4 Ortenzi, G., Noack, L., Sohl, F., et al. 2020, Scientific Reports, 10, 10907, doi: 10.1038/s41598-020-67751-7 Owen, J. E. 2019, Annual Review of Earth and Planetary Sciences, 47, 67, doi: 10.1146/annurev-earth-053018-060246 Owen, J. E., & Alvarez, M. A. 2016, ApJ, 816, 34, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/816/1/34 15 

Owen, J. E., & Wu, Y. 2017, ApJ, 847, 29, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa890a Park Coy, B., Xue, Q., Weiner Mansfield, M., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.11911, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.11911 Peslier, A. H., Sch¨ onb¨ achler, M., Busemann, H., & Karato, S.-I. 2017, SSRv, 212, 743, doi: 10.1007/s11214-017-0387-z Pezzotti, C., Attia, M., Eggenberger, P., Buldgen, G., & Bourrier, V. 2021, A&A, 654, L5, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202141734 Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., Thorngren, D. P., Kempton, E. M.-R., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2512.01805, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.01805 Pierrehumbert, R. T. 2010, Principles of Planetary Climate Pioli, L., Bonadonna, C., Azzopardi, B. J., Phillips, J. C., & Ripepe, M. 2012, Journal of Geophysical Research (Solid Earth), 117, B03204, doi: 10.1029/2011JB008392 Rauer, H., Aerts, C., Cabrera, J., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26, doi: 10.1007/s10686-025-09985-9 Rogers, J. G. 2025, MNRAS, 539, 2230, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf628 Rogers, J. G., Young, E. D., & Schlichting, H. E. 2025, MNRAS, 544, 3496, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf1940 Rogers, L. A. 2015, ApJ, 801, 41, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/801/1/41 Rogers, L. A., & Seager, S. 2010, ApJ, 712, 974, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/712/2/974 Salvador, A., & Samuel, H. 2023, Icarus, 390, 115265, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115265 Salvador, A., Avice, G., Breuer, D., et al. 2023, SSRv, 219, 51, doi: 10.1007/s11214-023-00995-7 Schaefer, L., & Elkins-Tanton, L. T. 2018, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, 376, 20180109, doi: 10.1098/rsta.2018.0109 Schaefer, L., & Fegley, Jr., B. 2017, ApJ, 843, 120, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa784f Schulik, M., & Booth, R. A. 2023, MNRAS, 523, 286, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad1251 Schulik, M., & Owen, J. E. 2025, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 542, 927, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf775 Seager, S., Kuchner, M., Hier-Majumder, C. A., & Militzer, B. 2007, ApJ, 669, 1279, doi: 10.1086/521346 Selsis, F., Leconte, J., Turbet, M., Chaverot, G., & Bolmont, ´E. 2023, Nature, 620, 287, doi: 10.1038/s41586-023-06258-3 Sergeev, D. E., Mayne, N. J., Bendall, T., et al. 2023, Geoscientific Model Development, 16, 5601, doi: 10.5194/gmd-16-5601-2023 Serrano, L. M., Gandolfi, D., Mustill, A. J., et al. 2022, Nature Astronomy, 6, 736, doi: 10.1038/s41550-022-01641-y Shorttle, O., Jordan, S., Nicholls, H., Lichtenberg, T., & Bower, D. J. 2024, ApJL, 962, L8, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad206e Sim, S. J., Hirschmann, M. M., & Hier-Majumder, S. 2024, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 129, e2024JE008346, doi: 10.1029/2024JE008346 Sohl, L. E., Fauchez, T. J., Domagal-Goldman, S., et al. 2024, PSJ, 5, 175, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ad5830 Sossi, P. A., Burnham, A. D., Badro, J., et al. 2020, Science Advances, 6, eabd1387, doi: 10.1126/sciadv.abd1387 Sossi, P. A., Tollan, P. M. E., Badro, J., & Bower, D. J. 2023, Earth and Planetary Science Letters, 601, 117894, doi: 10.1016/j.epsl.2022.117894 Spada, F., Demarque, P., Kim, Y.-C., & Sills, A. 2013, ApJ, 776, 87, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/776/2/87 Suer, T.-A., Jackson, C., Grewal, D. S., Dalou, C., & Lichtenberg, T. 2023, Frontiers in Earth Science, 11, 1159412, doi: 10.3389/feart.2023.1159412 Tang, Y., Fortney, J. J., & Murray-Clay, R. 2024, ApJ, 976, 221, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad8567 Teske, J. K., Wallack, N. L., Piette, A. A. A., et al. 2025, ApJL, 995, L39, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae0a4c Thompson, M. A., Sossi, P. A., Bower, D. J., et al. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2510.05281, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2510.05281 Tinetti, G., Eccleston, P., Lueftinger, T., et al. 2022, in European Planetary Science Congress, EPSC2022–1114, doi: 10.5194/epsc2022-1114 Unterborn, C. T., Desch, S. J., Haldemann, J., et al. 2023, ApJ, 944, 42, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/acaa3b Valatsou, M., Dorn, C., Marty, P., & Owen, J. E. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2602.12201, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.12201 Vitense, E. 1953, ZA, 32, 135 Walbecq, A., Samuel, H., & Limare, A. 2025, Icarus, 434, 116513, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2025.116513 Watson, A. J., Donahue, T. M., & Walker, J. C. G. 1981, Icarus, 48, 150, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(81)90101-9 Werlen, A., Dorn, C., Schlichting, H. E., Grimm, S. L., & Young, E. D. 2025, ApJL, 988, L55, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adf185 Wolf, A. S., & Bower, D. J. 2018, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 278, 59, doi: 10.1016/j.pepi.2018.02.00410.31223/osf.io/4c2s5 Wolfgang, A., & Lopez, E. 2015, The Astrophysical Journal, 806, 183, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/806/2/183 16 

Wordsworth, R., & Kreidberg, L. 2022, ARA&A, 60, 159, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-052920-125632 Wordsworth, R., & Pierrehumbert, R. 2014, ApJL, 785, L20, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/785/2/L20 Wordsworth, R., Seeley, J. T., & Shine, K. P. 2024, Planet. Sci. J., 5, 67, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ad226d Wordsworth, R. D., Schaefer, L. K., & Fischer, R. A. 2018, AJ, 155, 195, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aab608 Yoshida, T., & Gaidos, E. 2025, A&A, 696, L13, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202553667 Yoshida, T., Terada, N., & Kuramoto, K. 2024, Progress in Earth and Planetary Science, 11, 59, doi: 10.1186/s40645-024-00666-3 Zeng, L., Sasselov, D. D., & Jacobsen, S. B. 2016, ApJ, 819, 127, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/2/127 Zhang, L., Meng, Y., Yang, W., et al. 2014, Science, 344, 877, doi: 10.1126/science.1250274 Zieba, S., Zilinskas, M., Kreidberg, L., et al. 2022, A&A, 664, A79, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202142912