Title: The Fe I 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator: Insights from Spectral Ratio Analysis

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.29455v1

Published Time: Mon, 03 Aug 2026 01:11:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 16

Markdown Content:
MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026) Preprint 3 August 2026 Compiled using MNRAS L ATEX style file v3.3 

# The Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator: Insights from Spectral Ratio Analysis 

# Katlyn L. Hobbs, 1 Christopher A. Watson, 1 Jean C. Costes, 1 Yvonne Unruh, 2 Dana Clarice Yaptangco, 2

# Krishnamurthy Sowmya, 3 Mitchell E. Young, 1 Ernst J. W. de Mooij, 1 Alexander G. M. Pietrow, 4

# Pál Váradi Nagy, 5 Alexander I. Shapiro, 3,6 Veronika Witzke, 3 Federica Rescigno, 7 Ryan A. Rubenzahl, 8

# Megan Bedell, 8 Andrew Collier Cameron, 9 Xavier Dumusque, 10 Sean M. O’Brien, 1

# Benjamin M. J. Cadell, 1 Baptiste Klein, 11 Niamh Mallaghan, 1 Niamh K. O’Sullivan, 11 Toby Rodel 1

# and Sara Tavella 10 

> 1

Queen’s University Belfast, Belfast, University Road, BT7 1NN, UK 

> 2

Department of Physics, Imperial College London, UK 

> 3

University of Graz, Institute of Physics, Universitätsplatz 5, 8010 Graz, Austria 

> 4

Leibniz-Institut für Astrophysik Potsdam (AIP), An der Sternwarte 16, 14482 Potsdam, Germany 

> 5

Independent Researcher, Cluj-Napoca, Romania 

> 6

Max-Planck-Institut für Sonnensystemforschung, Justus-von-Liebig-Weg 3, 37077 Göttingen, Germany 

> 7

School of Physics & Astronomy, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK 

> 8

Center for Computational Astrophysics, Flatiron Institute, Simons Foundation, 162 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010, USA 

> 9

Centre for Exoplanet Science, SUPA School of Physics and Astronomy, University of St Andrews, North Haugh, St Andrews KY16 9SS, UK 

> 10

Astronomy Department of the University of Geneva, 51 ch. des Maillettes, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland 

> 11

Denys Wilkinson Building, Department of Physics, University of Oxford, OX1 3RH, UK 

Accepted XXX. Received YYY; in original form ZZZ 

ABSTRACT 

Faculae are a dominant source of stellar activity noise in radial velocity measurements, yet their low contrast and broad surface distribution make them difficult to track in disc-integrated observations. We apply Spectral Ratio Analysis (SRA) to HARPS-N Sun-as-a-star observations to isolate and characterize the spectral imprint of facular regions over rotational timescales. The resulting SRA spectra show coherent, line-dependent variability sensitive to surface magnetic activity, with the Fe i 4377 Å line exhibiting a particularly strong diagnostic response to facular coverage. We interpret the observed signatures using two complementary synthetic frameworks: composite PHOENIX spectra, from which we derive best-fit facular temperature contrasts in the range 200–400 K, and MPS-ATLAS spectra synthesized using MURaM simulations of the quiet Sun including a small-scale dynamo and magnetically-enhanced facular analogues with initial mean vertical magnetic fields of 100G, 200G, and 300G. Both approaches are benchmarked against facular filling factors measured from Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) disc-resolved images. We find good agreement between SDO-measured and SRA-inferred filling factors using the Fe i 4377 Å line, with Pearson R coefficients of 0.587–0.927 across models and timescales. The estimated filling factors track the solar activity cycle, rising from ∼ 1.5 % at lower activity to ∼ 5.5 % at higher activity, consistent with SDO-measured filling factors. These results demonstrate that SRA offers a means to reliably track surface magnetic activity in disc-resolved spectra, which is necessary for mitigating the effects of activity on RV characterization of exoplanet masses and atmospheres at modern precision. 

Key words: techniques: spectroscopic – Sun: activity – stars: activity – (techniques): radial velocity. 

1 INTRODUCTION 

The discovery of Earth-sized exoplanets orbiting at ∼1 AU around Sun-like stars remains one of the key goals of the exoplanet com-munity. Although such planets have yet to be found, they will pro-vide critical benchmarks for understanding the processes of planet formation, the diversity of planetary systems, and the conditions re-quired for potentially habitable environments. Multiple surveys are targeting long-period, low-mass exoplanets orbiting bright nearby stars, including: the High Accuracy Radial velocity Planet Searcher for the Northern hemisphere (HARPS-N) Rocky Planet Search (Cosentino et al. 2012a; Motalebi et al. 2015); the Echelle SPectro-graph for Rocky Exoplanets and Stable Spectroscopic Observations (ESPRESSO) blind radial velocity survey (Hojjatpanah et al. 2019; Pepe et al. 2021); the EXtreme PREcision Spectrograph (EXPRES) 100 Earths survey (Jurgenson et al. 2016; Brewer et al. 2020, 2022); and the NN-EXPLORE Exoplanet Investigations with Doppler spec-troscopy (NEID) Earth twin survey (Schwab et al. 2016; Gupta et al. 2021, 2026). Future efforts such as the Terra Hunting Experiment (Thompson et al. 2016) and the PLAnetary Transits and Oscillations 

© 2026 The Authors arXiv:2607.29455v1 [astro-ph.SR] 31 Jul 2026 2 K. L. Hobbs et al. 

of stars (PLATO ; Rauer et al. 2014, 2025) will further expand this search. The exoplanet discoveries that emerge from these surveys will provide key targets for further characterization with future direct imaging missions such as the Habitable Worlds Observatory (HWO ;Hartman 2018). Among the primary exoplanet detection techniques currently avail-able, the radial velocity (RV) method is fundamental to the character-ization of Earth-analogues. While the transit method is valuable for measuring the radii of planetary bodies, ground-based RV follow-up is typically required to measure the mass of any detected plane-tary candidates. Achieving such mass measurements is particularly challenging for Earth-analogues since they induce extremely small Doppler signals on their host stars (for context, Earth induces a 

∼10 cm s −1 RV semi-amplitude reflex motion on the Sun). Current state-of-the-art instruments can, in principle, reach the instrumental precision required to detect such signals (see Fischer et al. 2016; Crass et al. 2021; Burt et al. 2025, for review), depending on survey design and a sufficient number of observations (see Langellier et al. 2021; Luhn et al. 2023; Gupta 2023). Nevertheless, low-mass exo-planets with long ( ∼ 1 year) orbital periods remain largely undetected, primarily because stellar variability induces RV signals that are typ-ically an order of magnitude larger than those generated by such planets. This stellar variability is primarily driven by surface convec-tion, magnetic activity, and their interactions. Active regions (such as spots (Huerta et al. 2008), plages or faculae (Meunier et al. 2010)), granulation and supergranulation (Lakeland et al. 2024; O’Sullivan et al. 2025), oscillations (Luhn et al. 2024), and flares (Pietrow et al. 2024) distort spectral line profiles, producing apparent RV shifts that can mask or mimic planetary signals. These stochastic variations can be of the order of 0.5 – 10 m s −1 or more, occurring on timescales ranging from minutes (e.g., oscillations) to decades (e.g., magnetic cycles). In some cases, this has led to spurious or disputed planet de-tections (e.g. Barnard’s star, Ribas et al. 2018; Lubin & HPF Science 2022, Kapetyn’s star, Anglada-Escude et al. 2014; Robertson et al. 2015; Ji et al. 2019, and HD 41248, Jenkins et al. 2013; Santos et al. 2014; Jenkins & Tuomi 2014; Feng et al. 2017; Faria et al. 2020). Resolving small planetary signals thus requires disentangling these diverse sources of stellar variability signals across both amplitude and time. In particular, plages and faculae are large impediments to the de-tection of Earth-analogues. These features are bright, magnetically active regions that form when strong magnetic fields suppress the underlying convection in the stellar chromosphere and photosphere, thereby suppressing the overall convective blueshift (Meunier et al. 2010; Lakeland et al. 2024). This is the dominant RV effect in stars exhibiting solar-like activity levels (Haywood et al. 2016; Milbourne et al. 2019; Meunier 2024). Although related, faculae and plage refer to magnetic structures in different layers of the solar atmo-sphere, with faculae referring to bright, magnetically active regions in the photosphere, while plage refers to their chromospheric coun-terparts (Cretignier et al. 2024). Since RV measurements are predom-inantly derived from photospheric absorption lines, they are primar-ily sensitive to the photospheric manifestation of magnetic activity (Dravins et al. 1981). While literature often uses “plage” and “facu-lae” interchangeably, we adopt the term faculae henceforth. On the Sun, faculae-driven variability drives RV amplitudes over rotational timescales of ∼0.4 – 1 m s −1 depending on the activity level, while net changes in facular filling factor across the solar cycle create vari-ations of up to ∼8 – 10 m s −1 (Meunier et al. 2010; Cretignier et al. 2024). The facular filling factor can reach up to ∼10% at solar max-imum, while their relatively diffuse distributions across the stellar surface, and lower contrast with the surrounding photosphere com-pared to spots make these regions difficult to track in disc-integrated measurements. Furthermore, the lifetime of faculae is on the order of weeks to months, making them longer living than other variability features (i.e. spots with lifetimes of days to weeks), and often persist across multiple rotations of the Sun (Collier Cameron et al. 2019; Kontogiannis et al. 2025; Finley et al. 2025). Thus, these bright, magnetically active regions represent a major barrier to the detection of low-amplitude planetary signals. Stellar faculae also complicate the characterization of exoplanet atmospheres. Transmission spectroscopy (which observes starlight passing through a planet’s atmosphere during transit) is sensitive to such stellar features. Oshagh et al. (2014) demonstrated that occulta-tions of stellar faculae during transit can bias the inferred planet-to-star radius ratio, producing overestimates of up to 10% at short wave-lengths in M-dwarf systems. Similarly, Rackham et al. (2018) showed that unocculted faculae regions introduce wavelength-dependent con-tamination in transmission spectra, affecting inferred planetary radii and atmospheric characterization. These effects of stellar contam-ination highlight the need to understand facular regions and their effects on stellar spectra, both for RV measurement and transmission spectroscopy. A number of techniques and observing strategies have been de-veloped to mitigate the effect of stellar noise on RV signals, how-ever, a unified way of addressing the stellar activity problem has not been identified, and the individual contributions of particular active regions remain poorly understood (e.g., Zhao et al. 2022). This underscores the need to develop a deeper understanding of how stellar activity imprints on the observed spectra, and motivates the development of more sensitive and physically-motivated activity in-dicators. Recent work has also shown that commonly used solar ref-erence spectra are contaminated with activity, highlighting the need to understand activity indicators and develop truly quiet variability references (Hanassi-Savari et al. 2025). Particularly, indicators that probe photospheric changes, where spectral lines that are used for RV extraction are typically formed, may prove more effective than traditional proxies such as log R ′ 

> HK

that instead track chromospheric activity. Ultimately, these novel indicators can be used in tandem with existing diagnostics that measure the line-profile asymmetries caused by stellar activity. These include, for example, the Δ𝛼𝐵 2 indicator, a proxy for the differential unsigned magnetic flux that is measured directly from the profiles of absorption lines (Lienhard et al. 2023), or the Full Width at Half-Maximum (FWHM; Boisse et al. 2011) and the Bisector Inverse Slope (BIS; Queloz et al. 2001) that are derived from the shape of the cross-correlation function (CCF; Baranne et al. 1996; Pepe et al. 2002) used to measure RVs. These can be integrated into advanced mitigation techniques (e.g., Rajpaul et al. 2015; John et al. 2021; Klein et al. 2024; Liang et al. 2024; Gilbertson et al. 2024), improving both the interpretation of RV modelling and the effectiveness of noise reduction, while providing deeper insights into the stellar processes driving the observed RV variability. To further understand the spectral impact of activity and develop new indicators, Thompson et al. (2017) introduced an approach using ratios of high- and low-activity spectra to examine how the spectra of 𝛼 Cen B varied between magnetically quiet and active states. Fol-lowing Costes et al. (2026), we refer to this approach as Spectral Ratio Analysis (SRA). Using spectra taken with the High Accuracy Radial Velocity Planet Searcher (HARPS: Pepe et al. 2000), Thomp-son et al. (2017) uncovered hundreds of residual spectral features within the 4300 – 5300 Å range with flux variability that correlated with log R ′

> HK

. Additionally, many of these features showed velocity shifts that were modulated by the rotation period of the star and by  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator 3

the stellar activity levels. To understand how particular surface ac-tivity features correlated with these spectral variations, Thompson et al. (2020) used HARPS-N disc-integrated Solar spectra and found that many of these spectral signatures correlated with facular filling factors derived from disc-resolved images from the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI; Scherrer et al. 2012) instrument on the So-lar Dynamics Observatory (SDO; Pesnell et al. 2012). They further showed that these spectral features varied in amplitude with the solar rotation period, and in phase with a significant faculae region visible in SDO images. In this study, we build on the known correlation between facular filling factor and the strength of SRA residual features established by Thompson et al. (2017, 2020) and Costes et al. (2026) to de-velop a framework that can infer facular areal coverage directly from high-resolution spectra. We focus on the Fe i 4377 Å line, which exhibits the most pronounced response to facular coverage and thus provides the strongest diagnostic leverage (Thompson et al. 2020). In brief, we compute model SRA residuals using synthetic spectra from PHOENIX (Husser et al. 2013) and MURaM (Vögler et al. 2005), and determine the best-fitting models to HARPS-N SRA solar obser-vations to characterize faculae-driven spectral variability. Crucially, this approach enables facular filling factors to be inferred directly from spectral observations. This framework can thus be applied to high-resolution spectral observations of other stars. In Section 2 we discuss the HARPS-N Solar Telescope observa-tions used in this study. In Section 3 we motivate our choice of the Fe I 4377 Å feature as a tracer of faculae further. In Section 4 we describe our process of using PHOENIX and MURaM models to fit the observations and estimate the areal coverage of facular regions; in Section 5, we compare our estimations to faculae filling factor values measured from disc-resolved images taken by SDO. Finally, in Section 6 we outline our conclusions. 

2 HARPS-N SOLAR TELESCOPE OBSERVATIONS 

The HARPS-N solar telescope (Dumusque et al. 2015; Phillips et al. 2016) is a 3-inch guided telescope mounted on the exterior of the 3.58m Telescope Nationale Galileo (TNG) enclosure at the Roque de Los Muchachos observatory in La Palma, Spain. The instrument has been observing the Sun daily since 2015, with 5-minute in-tegration times. It operates by feeding sunlight via an integrating sphere along an optical fibre into the HARPS-N spectrograph to ob-tain disc-integrated Sun-as-a-star observations. HARPS-N itself is a wavelength-stabilized echelle spectrograph with a long-term instru-mental precision of ∼ 0.5 m/s, a wavelength coverage spanning 3830 Å to 6900 Å, and a resolution of 115,000 (Cosentino et al. 2012b). We refer the reader to (Dumusque et al. 2015) for more details about the solar telescope. 

2.1 Selected Data 

All data used in this study were processed with the Data Reduc-tion Software (DRS) version 3.2.0 (Dumusque et al. 2026). For this path-finding study, we focused on two time intervals, each cover-ing approximately three solar rotations: 2016 June 01 through 2016 August 31, and 2022 May 01 through 2022 July 31. These inter-vals probe different activity levels during descending and ascending phases of the 11-year solar cycle, respectively, as seen in Figure 1. Rather than the quietest or most active available epochs, these data were chosen to better reflect the possible activity states when observ-ing other stars and to test the sensitivity of our method away from the activity extremes. Each interval was selected to span multiple rotations in order to capture the full lifecycle of active regions as they traverse the visible solar disc: emerging at the limb, transiting disc centre, and receding at the opposite limb. This allows us to track how the emergence, evolution, and disappearance of features such as faculae affect the spectral line profiles studied. Both intervals exhibit clear periodic signals in the log R ′ 

> HK

chromospheric activity index and faculae filling factor (measured using SDO, see Section 5) across multiple rotations (see Figure 1), as well as pronounced rotational modulation in sunspot coverage, with sunspot numbers varying sig-nificantly within individual rotation cycles 1 (Clette & Lefèvre 2015). Periods of large variation in activity across individual rotation cycles were chosen such that contrast could be seen in the features over time. These two periods also allow us to test the method across an instrumental intervention. The 2016 data share the same instrumen-tal configuration as our chosen low-activity template, whereas the 2022 data follow a 2018 instrumental change. Including the post-intervention period therefore tests whether the method can reliably recover active-region areal coverage despite changes to the instru-ment, providing a more stringent demonstration of its robustness. We began with the full set of S2D (Science 2D, order-by-order ex-tracted) solar spectra. We chose these over one-dimensional spectra to preserve the pixel sampling and instrumental line-spread func-tion within each echelle order. We applied a series of quality cuts to ensure reliable and homogeneous measurements across all observa-tions. Collier Cameron et al. (2019) define a quality flag representing the probability that an observation is free from extinction-related contamination. Following the recommendations of this work, we only selected data with quality flags ≥ 0.99 . This removes spectra affected by partial obscuration of the solar disc (e.g., due to the passage of clouds, calima, high levels of differential extinction, or temporary tracking errors), which can distort the rotational line pro-file and introduce systematic errors in the measured radial velocities (Collier Cameron et al. 2019). Our analysis is, however, performed directly on the spectra rather than on the derived radial velocities. While the quality flag ensures that extinction-related systematics are adequately corrected at the RV level, the spectra themselves are not corrected for these effects and may still retain wavelength-dependent distortions arising from differential extinction across the solar disc. To minimize atmospheric extinction gradients and differential refrac-tion effects, we further restrict the sample to observations obtained at an airmass less than 1.5, corresponding to times when the Sun is sufficiently elevated above the horizon. Furthermore, large extinc-tion correction values ( RV ext ) are indicative of unstable observing conditions and can imprint systematic trends in the derived radial ve-locities and residual spectra (Collier Cameron et al. 2019), therefore we exclude spectra with radial velocity extinction corrections where 

|RV ext | > 10 cm s −1.Finally, the features seen in SRA (see Section 2.2) typically have amplitudes around 1% , thus we require high signal-to-noise, ensur-ing that photon noise is subdominant to activity-driven variability in the wavelength region of interest. Following Thompson et al. (2020), we require a mean signal-to-noise ratio ≥ 100 within echelle or-ders 40–49. We further increase signal-to-noise by combining daily spectra (see Section 2.2 for details).   

> 1https://lasp.colorado.edu/lisird/data/international_ sunspot_number
> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# 4 K. L. Hobbs et al.       

> Figure 1. Time series of the disc-integrated solar chromospheric activity log 𝑅 ′
> HK index, measured from HARPS-N Sun-as-a-star observations between 2015 and 2025. Blue points show daily averaged values, while the pink star indicates the low-activity reference day used throughout this work. The long-term evolution traces the solar magnetic cycle, with a clear minimum around 2019–2020 and rising activity toward the subsequent maximum. The inset panels show variation in facular filling factor (measured using SDO, see Section 5) in pink in the top panel, and variation in log R ′
> HK in the bottom panel. These insets highlight the shorter timescale variability over the June-August 2016 and May-July 2022 periods studied in this paper (corresponding to low- and high-activity phases, respectively) and show clear rotational modulation and active-region evolution in both cases.

2.2 Data Processing and SRA 

For the analysis in this paper, we follow the data processing steps of Thompson et al. (2017, 2020), and Costes et al. (2026). For clarity, and to highlight the differences in our analysis, we outline the steps here. Following the motivation outlined in Section 2.1, we identify 2017 July 23 as a low-activity day from our filtered data set prior to the in-strument interference in 2018, selected on the basis of its low log 𝑅 ′

> HK

value (pink in Figure 1). As mentioned previously, we choose an inter-mediate activity level day as opposed to a Solar minimum reference to simulate differences in activity levels similar to those that might be observed in other stars. Additionally, images from the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) on SDO (Schou et al. 2012; Pesnell et al. 2012; Couvidat et al. 2016) confirm a nearly spotless solar surface with minimal presence of faculae, making this date a close represen-tation of an almost immaculate solar photosphere. All spectra from this day are used, and by following the recommended procedure on the Data & Analysis Centre for Exoplanets (DACE) 2, we began by dividing the flux per pixel by the pixel size to remove any remaining effects of dispersion from the continuum. While standard barycen-tric corrections applied by the DRS account for the motion of the observatory relative to the Solar System barycentre, Sun-as-a-star analyses require a heliocentric reference frame as the Solar System barycentre is offset from the centre of the Sun due to planetary grav-itational effects. Thus, spectra were additionally adjusted using the  

> 2https://dace.unige.ch/dashboard/

barycentric to heliocentric correction from DACE. This adjustment shifts the wavelength grid of each spectrum. We took the spectrum with the highest signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) across echelle orders 41-50 for the day as our template wavelength grid and interpolated each heliocentric-corrected spectrum onto this grid using a cubic spline interpolation. Finally, we combined all the spectra passing our data quality cuts into a single low-activity template via a weighted average, where each spectrum was weighted by the inverse square of its mean SNR across echelle orders 41–50. When binning per day, the SNR is generally limited by the number of flat fields taken daily which are used to reduce the data; as a result, we obtained an averaged template spectrum with SNR ∼900. High-activity days are treated analogously: spectra from each day were combined into weighted averages following the same procedure – including interpolating heliocentric-corrected spectra to the same reference wavelength grid defined by the low activity day – yielding spectra with typical signal-to-noise ratios of ∼600 – 900. These averaged spectra were then compared to the low-activity template using SRA, constructed by dividing each high-activity spectrum by the low activity template. Large-scale continuum and blaze profile variations largely cancel out when taking the ratio of the spectra. We thus obtain a residual spectrum for each day, highlighting line profile changes relative to the low-activity reference as a function of activity level. Similar to Thompson et al. (2020) and Costes et al. (2026), we find a characteristic ripple pattern present in the residual spectra. These features appear across all spectral orders with varying ampli-tude and wavelength scales. Changing the low-activity template used  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator 5

to generate the residuals had no effect on the presence of these rip-ples. Similar patterns have been reported in other instruments, such as ESPRESSO, which exhibit wiggle-like structures that are likely caused by optical interference (Tabernero et al. 2021). In Thompson et al. (2020), they postulate that etaloning is the suspected cause of this pattern. To isolate and remove these ripples, we applied a Generalized Lomb-Scargle periodogram to each residual spectrum to identify the dominant frequency of the ripple. However, we observe that the frequency of the ripple varies as a function of wavelength. In general, ripple frequencies tended to decrease at longer wavelengths. Rather than fitting multiple sine waves – as done by Thompson et al. (2020) – we fit a wavelength-scaled sinusoidal function whose frequency changes smoothly with wavelength, which more effectively suppressed the ripple patterns. The fitted function is defined as: 

𝑀 ripple (𝜆 ) = 𝐴 · sin 



2𝜋 𝑓 · ( 𝜆 − 𝑇 0) · 𝜆 med 

𝜆 



+ 𝑘 (1) where 𝑀 ripple (𝜆 ) is the model amplitude of the ripple at a given wavelength, 𝐴 is the amplitude, 𝑓 is the frequency identified from the Lomb-Scargle periodogram, 𝑇 0 is the phase offset, 𝑘 is a constant vertical offset, 𝜆 is the wavelength array, and 𝜆 med is the median wavelength of the spectrum (Costes et al. 2026). The fitted model was subsequently subtracted from each residual spectrum, and allowed the activity-induced features to be more visible. After applying the filters and processing steps outlined above, we obtain the final residual spectra used in our analysis. Examples of these reduced residual spectra are shown in Figure 2, in which we reproduce the results from Thompson et al. (2020) in a small region of the solar spectrum as an example. The top panel shows the low-activity template spectrum as a reference for the line spectroscopic line profiles. The bottom panel of the figure shows five random selected daily SRA residual spectra with varying values of log R ′

> HK

,plotted in increasing log R ′ 

> HK

from bottom to top. Note that all spectra in this study are plotted in vacuum wavelengths. 

3 THE FE I 4377 Å FEATURE AS A TRACER OF FACULAE 

In Figure 1 we note that log R ′ 

> HK

is strongly correlated with the facu-lae filling-factor variations. However, log R ′ 

> HK

is unlikely to provide a reliable characterisation of facular features specifically, which are the primary drivers of RV variations (see, e.g., Meunier & Sulis 2026). Ca ii H&K emission responds to changes in plage regions, the chromospheric counterparts of photospheric faculae (see Section 1), rather than to the faculae themselves. Plage area coverages derived from Ca ii measurements are at least three times larger than pho-tospheric facular coverages (see, e.g., Chatzistergos 2017; Sowmya et al. 2021), because the flux tubes that form magnetic features ex-pand with height in the atmosphere. Additionally, the retrieval of plage area coverages from Ca ii emission is affected by contamina-tion from spots. As demonstrated by Sowmya et al. (2023), spots also lead to an increase in Ca ii H&K emission, similar to plages. The flux tubes forming spots expand with height, leading to the formation of superpenumbrae in the chromosphere, which appear brighter in the Ca ii line cores than the surrounding quiet regions. Consequently, the observed chromospheric Ca ii emission is a combination of contribu-tions from both plages and spots, making it challenging to separate their individual effects. Although this is not a major concern for the Sun, where spot coverages are much smaller than faculae/plage cov-erages, it may become an issue for stars that are more active than the Sun and have larger spot coverages. Information gathered from the lines that form log R ′ 

> HK

therefore cannot be directly mapped to faculae. Ca ii H&K lines additionally require intensive non-LTE modelling that limits their use for other spectral types. These limitations motivate a more direct diagnostic of photo-spheric faculae. In addition, such studies specifically targeting photo-spheric faculae may be applicable to better constraining their impact on, for example, transmission spectroscopy (as discussed in Section 1 – see Rackham et al. 2018 and Oshagh et al. 2014). Here, we demonstrate that SRA features directly trace faculae. SRA primarily arise from photospheric rather than chromospheric variations, and are well captured by standard PHOENIX and MURaM models (see Sections 4.1 and 4.2), thus these offer a more direct and broadly applicable route to characterising faculae on other stars. SRA residuals in fact reveal hundreds of spectral features that vary with stellar activity. Costes et al. (2026) showed that these fea-tures better capture RV variability than classical proxies, and that SRA-based indicators outperform conventional ones in planetary-injection-recovery tests. Because individual features vary indepen-dently and can behave quite differently from one another, we focus in this pilot study on a single line to interpret its variations. We se-lected Fe i 4377 Å as it shows one of the strongest and most coherent activity-related signals in the time series, in both amplitude and re-sponse, as found by Thompson et al. (2017, 2020) and Costes et al. (2026). While further investiation of SRA features and the impact of spots is needed, Thompson et al. (2020) notes that the 4377 Å feature is more strongly correlated with faculae filling factor than spot filling factor. This is thus a more reliable diagnostic of faculae using their spectral imprints. It is also one of the few such features covered by the currently available MP-ATLAS MURaM models, making it a natural choice for this study. The exploration of further lines is deferred to future work. Figure 3 highlights the time modulation of this feature, which exhibits changes in line depth consistent with the presence of faculae regions on the solar surface (Thompson et al. 2020). In this figure, we see the intensity of the residual flux change over the visible half of the solar rotation period, confirming that the feature is linked to rotationally-modulated activity on the visible disc of the Sun. We attribute the strong sensitivity of the Fe i 4377 Å line to the following underlying physical drivers. First, solar quiet photospheric plasma temperatures are such that iron is predominantly singly ion-ized. Fe i populations are thus a minority species relative to Fe ii (see e.g. Mihalas 1978; Gehren et al. 2001; Rutten 2003). This results in a higher sensitivity of Fe i to temperature (see e.g. the discussion in Section 3.3 of Sowmya et al. 2026). The temperature enhancement associated with facular magnetic fields (e.g. Vernazza et al. 1981; Fontenla et al. 1999) increases the degree of ionization, thereby re-ducing the Fe i population. Second, Fe i 4377 Å line is a strong spectral line that forms in the middle-upper photosphere where the temperature enhancement caused by facular magnetic fields is more pronounced. Third, Fe i 4377 Å line is a resonance line with the ground state as the lower level ( 𝐸 low = 0.0 eV; as recorded in the VALD3 database Piskunov et al. 1995; Ryabchikova et al. 2015). An increase in temperature redistributes the remaining Fe i population among excited levels according to the Boltzmann distribution (Miha-las 1978; Rutten 2003; Gray 2005), thereby decreasing the population of the ground state that serves as the lower level of the transition and reducing the line opacity. The combined action of these effects leads to a substantial weakening of the Fe i 4377 Å line in facular regions compared to the quiet Sun, making it an excellent tracer of changes in facular regions on the Solar disc. To further contextualize this behaviour, we turn to spatially re-solved observations of the Solar surface at the Fe i 4377 wavelength.  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# 6 K. L. Hobbs et al.      

> Figure 2. Top panel: observed low activity template Sun-as-a-star HARPS-N Solar spectrum, continuum normalized and shown over a select wavelength range for clarity of individual lines. Bottom: the ratio spectra across five different activity levels, over the same selected wavelength range. Various prominent features are highlighted here: The Fe ilines at 4377 Å and 4381 Å change in amplitude, with the first showing dramatic differences across activity. Variation can also be seen in the 4381 Å Fe iline, where the change is primarily seen in the wings of the feature.

These data allow us to directly connect variations in the line pro-file with the distribution and viewing geometry of facular regions. We obtained observations with a modified Solar Explorer (Sol’Ex; Buil et al. 2023) spectroheliograph located in Cluj-Napoca, Romania. The instrument was connected to a 62/400 mm refractor with a blue bandpass filter placed before the aperture as an energy rejection filter (ERF), effectively reducing its diameter down to 4 cm. The spectro-heliograph has an effective spectral resolving power of R ≈ 20 000 ,and can be tuned to a wide range of wavelengths when the ERF is changed (Váradi Nagy & Pietrow 2025). The setup can scan the full solar disc in about 1 min, during which time it takes around 4500 slit positions. The solar disc was reconstructed and stored as a FITS cube using the JSol’Ex 3 open source software (Champeau 2026) as described in Váradi Nagy & Pietrow (2025). In this case, Sol’Ex was tuned to a spectral window extending from approximately 4373 Å to 4386 Å and the data were calibrated using the atlas from Pietrow (2026). A total of 19 scans were recorded between 2025-08-15 and 2025-08-30 to sample different faculae filling factors; however, in the current work, only the best seeing data from day 2025-08-28 was used as a context image, shown in Figure 4. The top row of this figure shows two spectroheliograms of the solar surface constructed from different parts of the spectral line: the line core, and a continuum region at the red-edge of the line-wing. The final panel in the top row shows the ratio between the two images. In the image taken in the core of the Fe i 4377 Å line (top left), the facular regions appear  

> 3github.com/melix/astro4j/tree/main/jsolex

brighter compared to surrounding inactive regions. In contrast, the images taken in the continuum at the red-edge of the line (top middle), shows little to no enhancement in these same regions. The ratio image (top right) further emphasizes that the Fe i 4377 Å (and in particular its core) is indeed sensitive to the presence of faculae. We thus focus on this line as a diagnostic of faculae and use it to infer properties of these regions. Our primary goal was to determine whether HARPS-N spectra could be used to determine the fractional area of the solar disc covered by faculae at different activity levels. To investigate this, we compared the SRA residuals to synthetic spectra generated from stellar atmosphere models, allowing us to adjust relevant parameters and evaluate how different filling-factors of quiet-Sun and faculae-like components reproduce the observed solar variations. 

4 STELLAR MODELS AND FACULAE ESTIMATIONS 

To quantitatively interpret the observed modulation of the Fe i 4377 Å line and relate it to faculae coverage on the solar surface, we model the SRA-derived residuals using synthetic stellar spectra. We adopt two complementary modelling frameworks that differ in both physical assumptions and dimensionality: one based on one-dimensional PHOENIX stellar atmosphere models, and another us-ing three-dimensional magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations from MURaM.  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator 7   

> Figure 3. Trailed spectrum of the Fe i4377 Å feature as a function of time. Carrington rotation periods and half-periods are indicated by dashed and dot-ted lines, respectively. The colour scale traces the evolution of the residual line profile and the variation in its amplitude is consistent with rotational modulation. The slanted morphology of each emergent residual feature re-flects the expected blue-to-red shift of the feature as the prominent active region rotates across the stellar disc.

4.1 PHOENIX 

PHOENIX is a general-purpose stellar atmosphere code that com-putes self-consistent model atmospheres and synthetic spectra for stars across a broad range of temperatures, gravities, and compo-sitions (Hauschildt & Baron 1999). The code solves the radiative transfer equation in hydrostatic equilibrium for either plane-parallel or spherical geometry, incorporating detailed atomic and molecu-lar opacities treated line by line. PHOENIX includes comprehen-sive treatments of molecular and non-equilibrium chemistries and convection, enabling accurate modelling of both hot and cool stel-lar atmospheres. The resulting temperature–pressure structures and emergent spectra are routinely used to interpret stellar observations and derive fundamental stellar parameters. The PHOENIX models used in this work are drawn from the Göt-tingen Spectral Library (Husser et al. 2013), and for this study we restrict our analysis to Local Thermodynamic Equilibrium (LTE) ef-fects. Despite not including the physics necessary to self-consistently model faculae regions and thus being an incomplete representation of their complex structure (Witzke et al. 2022), approximating fac-ulae as slightly hotter than the quiet photosphere has been used in both solar and stellar activity modelling (e.g., Fontenla et al. 1999; Dumusque et al. 2014). Libraries of PHOENIX synthetic spectra have been used in numerous studies to simulate or approximate the effects of stellar activity from spots, plage and faculae. Typically, spectra computed at different effective temperatures are combined according to prescribed filling factors and surface distributions to represent the quiet photosphere and active regions. Herrero et al. (2016) applied this method to construct composite stellar spectra and quantify the impact of activity on line profiles and radial veloc-ities. The SOAP-GPU framework uses high-resolution PHOENIX spectra as templates for the quiet photosphere, spots, and faculae in efficient forward models of stellar activity (Zhao & Dumusque 2023; Zhao et al. 2025). A similar philosophy underlies the PAStar model of Petralia et al. (2025), which employs PHOENIX libraries to synthesize spectra of heterogeneous stellar photospheres for activity studies. For this study, we adopt solar metallicity ([Fe/H] = 0.0). We take a 5800 K synthetic spectrum as our “quiet Sun” reference, and we adopt a surface gravity of log 𝑔 = 4.5. Higher-temperature models (5800–6300 K) are used as proxies for facular regions. To approx-imate the modified opacity structure in facular regions, we experi-mented with a range of surface gravities, log 𝑔 = 3.5, 4.0, and 4.5. We find that the resulting faculae estimates (see Section 5) are relatively insensitive to log 𝑔 over the range tested, however minor differences are seen in the line profile at 4377 Å – we show this in Figure 5. A surface gravity value of 4.0 gives the lowest reduced 𝜒 2 values, likely because the decrease in surface gravity leads to the appearance of a trough on the left side of the feature, similar to the trough seen in the observed SRA residuals. Thus, we adopt log 𝑔 = 4.0 as a repre-sentative value for facular regions. This lower surface gravity serves as a proxy for the change in pressure broadening within the facular regions (Spruit 1976; Fontenla et al. 1993). The PHOENIX models are tabulated in discrete 100 K steps, thus we linearly interpolated between grid points (in step sizes of 50 K) to create spectra at intermediate temperatures, allowing finer control over the contrast between the faculae temperature and quiet Sun. All synthetic spectra were continuum-normalized by fitting a fourth-order polynomial and dividing by the resulting fit. This order of polynomial provides sufficient flexibility to model broad continuum variations without overfitting spectral line structure. The process removes large-scale variations in the continuum shape and ensures consistency with the normalization applied to the observed spectra, allowing direct comparison of line profiles. PHOENIX synthetic spectra are provided in the stellar rest frame at high intrinsic resolution (R ∼ 500,000 in the optical Husser et al. 2013) and do not include rotational broadening (i.e. effectively 

𝑣 sin 𝑖 = 0 km s −1). To approximate disc-integrated observations, the quiet-Sun spectrum was rotationally broadened using the PyAstron-omy routine fastRotBroad , adopting a projected rotational veloc-ity of 𝑣 sin 𝑖 = 2 km s −1 and a linear limb-darkening coefficient of 0.4 (Claret 2000). The facular spectrum was treated as a spatially-localized component and was therefore not rotationally broadened, representing emission from a small region near the disc centre where projected rotational effects are negligible. Instrumental broadening was applied by convolving all synthetic spectra with a Gaussian line spread function with width 2.54 km s −1, corresponding to re-solving power of HARPS-N (115,000). All synthetic spectra were subsequently interpolated onto the reference HARPS-N wavelength grid defined in Section 2 using cubic spline interpolation for direct comparison with observations. The quiet Sun and faculae spectra were then linearly combined by adjusting their relative contributions, simulating different fractional surface coverages. Equation 2 describes these calculations, 

𝐹 model = (1 − 𝛼 )𝐹 quiet + 𝛼𝐹 faculae , (2)  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# 8 K. L. Hobbs et al.       

> Figure 4. Top row: solar disc observed with Sol’Ex tuned to the line core of the 4377 Å feature (left), the outer wing of the same line (middle), and their ratio (right), which highlights enhanced contrast in facular regions. Bottom row: comparison between the Sol’Ex spectrum and the corresponding HARPS-N spectrum. The pink and purple markers indicate the wavelengths corresponding to the line-core and wing images shown in the top row, respectively.
> Figure 5. Example residual spectra of the HARPS-N data (purple points) in comparison to PHOENIX models of varying surface gravity values (3.5 in green, 4.0 in pink, 4.5 in blue.) Modelled residual spectra are created by dividing a linear combination of quiet Sun spectrum plus faculae spectrum (normalized by filling factor, here set to 4.5%) by a low activity reference (1% filling factor). See text for further details. Faculae coverage of 4.5 %was chosen to match SDO-measured values for this particular day (2022-06-13). Variation in the residuals seen here are representative of changes caused by varying surface gravity, and the best-fit reduced 𝜒 2values for each model are given in the legend, with surface gravity of 4.0 producing the best fit to the data.

where 𝐹 quiet is the flux of the quiet Sun spectrum, 𝐹 faculae is flux of the faculae proxy spectrum, and 𝛼 is the fractional area coverage of faculae on the visible solar disc. We began by creating a low-activity model spectrum, where the faculae coverage was set to 1%, similar to the solar faculae coverage as determined from SDO images (see Section 5 for details) of our low activity template on the day of 2017 July 23. We then created the ‘high’ activity spectra by allowing the combinations of quiet Sun and faculae proxy spectra to vary. Specifically, we varied the faculae filling factor, 𝛼 , from 1–10%, with step sizes of 0.2%. A radial velocity shift applied to all facular proxy spectra was also treated as a free parameter in the grid search, allowed to vary over ±2.5 km s −1,with step sizes of 0.25 km s −1 to account for Doppler shifts arising from the movement of active regions across the solar disc. For each of these combinations, SRA was then applied to create residuals between high-activity and low-activity spectra that highlights the relative changes in line profiles. We determined the best-fit parameters (temperature and faculae coverage) for each observing day using a grid search over synthetic models. We include the radial velocity of the facular proxy spectrum as a free parameter in the grid search; however, the best-fit RV values recovered from fitting the synthetic models to the HARPS-N residual spectra show no significant or coherent signal. We therefore do not an-alyze the recovered RV values further and instead focus on the best-fit temperature and faculae coverage. For each grid point, we computed the reduced 𝜒 2 statistic between the synthetic residual spectrum and the HARPS-N residual spectrum in a narrow wavelength window of 4377.0 to 4377.5 Å. The best-fitting model was selected as the pa-rameter combination yielding the minimum reduced 𝜒 2 value. This fit is repeated for each day, and we present the results in Section 5 along with fits using MURaM models (Section 4.2). 

4.2 MURaM 

For the second set of stellar models, we used 3D radiative magne-tohydrodynamic (MHD) simulations of the solar photosphere and  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator 9

upper convection zone performed with the MURaM code 4 (Vögler et al. 2005). It solves the full set of compressible magnetohydro-dynamic equations, coupled with non-grey radiative transfer and a realistic equation of state that includes partial ionization effects. MU-RaM simulations including a small-scale dynamo (SSD; Vögler & Schüssler 2007; Schüssler & Vögler 2008; Rempel 2014), but no additional magnetic fields, are used to represent the quiet Sun (see e.g. Witzke et al. 2024, for details) while simulations with average vertical magnetic fields of 100, 200, and 300 G imposed on the SSD setup are used to represent faculae (see e.g. Witzke et al. 2022; Kos-togryz et al. 2024). The imposed magnetic fields reorganize, leading to the formation of kG flux concentrations in the intergranular lanes (see e.g. Kostogryz et al. 2024; Bhatia et al. 2026). Synthetic spectra are then calculated from the simulated MURaM atmospheres using MPS-ATLAS (Witzke et al. 2021) radiative transfer code. The spectra are computed for 10 viewing geometries, parametrized by 𝜇 = cos 𝜃 

where 𝜃 is the heliocentric angle. 𝜇 = 1 corresponds to disc centre, and 𝜇 decreases in steps of 0.1 down to 𝜇 = 0.1 at the limb. The spectra are synthesized for at least 40 snapshots at a time cadence of 90 s from each set of MURaM simulations described here. We take a similar approach to creating our models with these synthetic spectra as we do with the PHOENIX spectra, with some differences. First, the spectra for each limb angle combination are averaged by stacking across multiple ‘snapshots’ run by the MURaM code. To construct a synthetic quiet Sun spectrum representative of the full stellar disc, we follow a disc-integration procedure. We as-sume a normalized solar radius of 1, and the SSD spectra for each 𝜇 

angle are then weighted by the sky projected area of their correspond-ing annulus. The resulting spectrum is a weighted sum over all 𝜇 bins and represents the disc-integrated quiet Sun. Rotational broadening is then applied to this spectrum to simulate the net rotational effect of the Sun viewed as a star, and instrumental broadening is applied. The synthetic spectra with injected magnetic fields of 100, 200, and 300 G were taken as the faculae proxy. We use the same method to produce model residuals as done for the PHOENIX spectra (see Section 4.1). In summary, we again created a low activity template with a 1% faculae filling factor, and created a grid of high activity models by varying the facular filling factors from 1% to 10%, while also varying the 𝜇 angle. We add this parameter to account for the centre-to-limb variation of facular contrasts and line profile shapes, with the goal of tracking faculae regions as they move across the solar disc. We normalize both the low activity and high activity synthetic spectra using the same polynomial normalization process. The synthetic SRA residuals are then created by dividing the active synthetic spectrum by the inactive one, and these are then compared to the HARPS-N observations and the reduced 𝜒 2 between the two are calculated across the full grid of generated synthetic SRA spectra. An example day of the resulting best-fit model residuals to the data are shown in Figure 6. The 100 G models tend to underestimate the amplitude of the Fe i feature, leading to overestimation of faculae areal coverage as the models favours a high filling factor to reach the amplitude of the observed residuals. Due to this, 100 G was removed as a parameter in further investigations. Additionally, while 300 G models provide the lowest reduced 𝜒 2 value, little difference is seen between the 200 G and 300 G models. For the remainder of this study we focus on the 200 G models for further analysis as Schrijver & Harvey (1994); Carlsson et al. (2019); Schrijver (2020) cite this as the canonical value for the magnetic field of faculae regions.    

> 4MURaM: The Max-Planck-Institute for Aeronomy/ University of Chicago Radiation Magneto-hydrodynamics code.
> Figure 6. Example spectra of the HARPS-N data (purple) in comparison to MURaM models of varying magnetic field strengths. 100 G model as a green dashed line, 200 G as a pink solid line, and 300 G as a dash-dotted blue line. Faculae coverage level is set to 4.5%, matching SDO values for this particular day (2022 June 13). Variations in the residuals seen here are representative of changes caused by varying magnetic field strengths, where the reduced 𝜒 2
> of each model to the residuals are given in the legend. Here, we can see that the 100 G model has a lower amplitude than the other models.

Figure 7 shows examples of best fit models for both PHOENIX and MURaM compared with the HARPS-N observations. The most prominent difference between the models is the presence of a pre-feature trough, which is reproduced by PHOENIX, but is absent in the MURaM fits. The pre-feature trough is seen in all observed spec-tra, however its origin, and thus the discrepancy between synthetic models, is beyond the scope of this work. 

5 COMPARISON WITH SDO/HMI FILLING FACTORS 

In this section, we compare the facular filling factors inferred from our HARPS-N spectral fitting with independent, disc-resolved mea-surements of the Sun from SDO/HMI. The goal is to assess whether the spectroscopically derived filling factors recover the true temporal variability of surface magnetic regions as seen in spatially resolved observations. SDO observes the solar surface with continuous full-disc coverage using two 4096x4096 pixel cameras – allowing for resolution at the granule level. It has three scientific instruments: the Atmospheric Imaging Assembly (AIA), Extreme Ultraviolet Variability Exper-iment, and the Helioseismic and Magnetic Imager (HMI) (Schou et al. 2012; Pesnell et al. 2012; Couvidat et al. 2016). For the dates analysed in this work, we use SDO/HMI magne-togram and continuum intensitygram data to derive spatial informa-tion about faculae regions of the Solar disc. Using SolAster (Ervin et al. 2022), we followed the method outlined by Haywood et al. (2016) and Milbourne et al. (2019) to calculate faculae filling fac-tors. Using HMI intensity and magnetogram images, we set a mag-netic field strength threshold value to differentiate between active and quiet pixels; this is set to 24 G. To differentiate between spots and faculae within the active pixels, we apply an intensity threshold of 𝐼 thresh > 0.89 ˆ 𝐼 quiet , where ˆ𝐼 quiet is the mean intensity of the quiet Sun regions. We compute facular filling factors both with and without an ad-ditional area threshold. In the thresholded case (hereafter denoted  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# 10 K. L. Hobbs et al. 

Figure 7. Various examples of the Fe i 4377 Å feature are shown for different observation days, with HARPS-N data displayed as dark blue points, PHOENIX best-fit models as green dashed lines, and MURaM models in as a red solid line. The left column corresponds to dates during the 2016 period, and the right column shows examples from the 2022 period. Dates were chosen to demonstrate the variation in amplitude of the SRA residuals across a rotation period, and to show the difference in amplitude of the feature between 2016 and 2022. MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026) Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator 11 

by ‘T’), we apply an area threshold of 2 microhemispheres ( 𝜇 Hem), corresponding to 6.08 × 10 6 km 2 on the solar surface. This threshold is applied to exclude small, network level brightness variations. The non-thresholded filling factors (hereafter denoted as ‘NT’) include all pixels satisfying the magnetic and intensity criteria, regardless of spatial extent. Figure 8 shows active regions for two example days in 2016 and 2022, and the distribution of limb angles for these active regions. 

5.1 Comparison of Model Estimates and SDO calculations 

We compare the facular filling factors derived from the PHOENIX and MURaM models to those determined from SDO images. With PHOENIX, we follow the method described in Section 4.1 for each day, obtaining a daily estimate for the temperature, radial velocity shift, and faculae areal coverage. The resulting faculae estimates of the 2016 and 2022 periods are presented in the top left and right panels of Figure 9, respectively. The bottom two panels of Figure 9 show the estimates given by the MURaM models. These estimates are obtained following the procedure outlined in Section 4.2. In Fig-ure 9, we observe that the estimated facular coverage moves between the NT and T curves. During the high-activity phase, the HARPS-N-estimated facular coverage mainly tracks the SDO filling factor derived from all regions (i.e. the NT curve in blue). This includes the facular regions as well as the magnetic network, represented by the bright pixels in the SDO images. Conversely, during lower-activity phase, the facular coverage follows the area-thresholded SDO filling factor, which corresponds only to larger facular regions. These vari-ations could be explained by the fact that, at lower activity levels, the contrast between magnetically active and quiet regions is reduced, thereby limiting our SRA residual fitting sensitivity to smaller-scale structures such as the magnetic network; as a result, the Fe i 4377 line preferentially traces the more prominent faculae at low activity, and a mix of faculae and network at high activity. We evaluate the agreement between the model-derived facular filling factors and those obtained from SDO using both definitions of the filling factor, i.e.: including all bright pixels (NT), and applying a 2 

𝜇 Hem area threshold (T). Table 5.1 shows the Pearson’s 𝑅 correlation for PHOENIX and MURaM estimates in both time periods, with both NT and T values. Overall, both models reproduce the temporal evolution of facular coverage across both epochs and definitions, however, the MURaM models provide higher Pearson R values and thus our measurements of faculae filling factor directly from spectra show stronger agreement with the values determined from the disc-resolved SDO images. Additionally, the PHOENIX model estimates for the 2022 period occasionally fall below the expected values and push to the upper limitations of temperatures. We find that this is due to larger errors bars on these days pulling the reduced 𝜒 2fit into the continuum, rather than properly fitting the peak. Removing these points from the correlation computations, we see an increase in the correlation coefficient for the 2022 interval for both PHOENIX cases. From 0.640 to 0.795 for PHOENIX 𝑁 𝑇 , and from 0.640 to 0.794 for PHOENIX 𝑇 . We see no change for MURaM 𝑁 𝑇 m and a slight decrease in MURaM 𝑇 from 0.927 to 0.926. Since the PHOENIX models are parametrized by facular temper-ature, we can directly measure the temperature contrast compared to the quiet Sun with our best-fit values. The best-fit faculae tem-peratures span approximately 6000–6200 K across the individually modelled observations, corresponding to a temperature contrast of roughly 200 – 400 K (relative to the adopted quiet Sun temperature of 5800 K). This is broadly consistent with the values reported in the literature, where Meunier et al. (2010) and Unruh et al. (1999) find            

> Table 1. Pearson correlation coefficients ( 𝑅 ) between model faculae estimates and SDO filling factors for 2016 and 2022. NT = non-thresholded; T = area-thresholded. Model 2016 2022
> PHOENIX NT 0.643 0.640
> PHOENIX T0.587 0.640
> MURaM NT 0.823 0.927
> MURaM T0.786 0.927

facular temperature contrasts of approximately 50 – 300 K depending on limb angle. Likewise, we find that our best fit 𝜇 angle from the MURaM models is between 0.3 and 0.5 across the individually modelled observations, which corresponds to roughly 73 to 60 degrees from disc centre on the visible disc. While this is a reasonable estimate of where faculae regions might be located, this is not in agreement with the measured average 𝜇 angles from SDO. As an example, on 2016 June 16 and 2022 June 18, the MURaM model fits give an estimated limb-angle of ∼ 0.5. However, from the SDO images for these dates, Figure 8 shows that the predominant limb angles of these active regions fall at 

∼ 0.9-1.0. It is possible that the models favour mid to low limb angles due to the contribution of a variety of active regions at various limb angles across the solar disc. It is also likely that the best fits favour models closer to the limb as these models show higher amplitudes in the residual feature, as seen in Figure A1. We thus conclude that we are currently insensitive to limb angle variations. As seen in Table 5.1, the MURaM models show stronger agreement with the SDO-derived filling factors. This is likely due to the MURaM models being based on a more physically-motivated representation of faculae, i.e. by using regions with injected higher magnetic fields. Meanwhile, the PHOENIX models are based on injection of higher temperature spectra, with no injected magnetic field, and thus likely provide a less accurate representation of the Sun at higher magnetic activity levels. Additionally, the PHOENIX models are based on models of other stars and different stellar types, while MURaM is a specifically solar model. While neither model fully encapsulates the complexity of faculae regions within the method presented here, both provide relative filling factor estimates directly from the HARPS-N spectra. 

5.2 Limitations and Further Work 

Several important caveats should be considered when interpreting these facular filling factors, particularly in terms of their absolute values. First, the SDO-derived filling factors depend on the adopted magnetic field and intensity thresholds; varying these selection crite-ria would directly change the fraction of pixels classified as faculae. Second, in the PHOENIX models and the disc-integrated SSD MU-RaM model, this approach treats the Sun as a source with uniform surface components and does not account for the spatial distribution of active regions across the solar disc. This simplification neglects centre-to-limb variations and projection effects that influence the ob-served facular signal. The models themselves also do not fully capture rotational broadening, and the method with which we broaden the synthetic spectra does not capture the exact physics of rotational line broadening. This can affect the inferred line profiles and, in turn, the derived filling factors. A more physically rigorous treatment, in which the stellar surface is tiled with spatially resolved synthetic spectra, each Doppler-shifted according to its projected rotational  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# 12 K. L. Hobbs et al.  

> Figure 8. Top row: SDO images of the solar surface for two example days of 2016 June 16 and 2022 June 18. Blue shows pixels defined as faculae with the area threshold applied, orange shows all magnetically active bright points (not visible due to scale), and red shows areas identified as spots. Concentric circles mark limb angles as given by SDO. Bottom row: Histograms of the limb angles calculated by SDO for each pixel defined as faculae, specifically for 2016 June 16 (left) and 2022 June 18 (right). T (blue bars) and NT (pink bars) distinguish between with and without the area threshold, respectively. See text for further definition.

velocity and then disc-integrated, would better capture these effects and is deferred to future work. Furthermore, our modelling assumes a fixed magnetic field strength in the MURaM framework and a limited parametrization of temperature contrast in the PHOENIX models, whereas real facu-lar regions exhibit a range of magnetic field strengths, temperatures, and geometric structures. In the PHOENIX approach, the filling fac-tor and the estimated effective temperature are inversely related (see Figure B1), creating a clear degeneracy where the areal coverage esti-mate is dependent on the temperature contrast. While the PHOENIX-based temperature estimates are consistent with values reported in the literature, this approach is inherently limited. Faculae cannot be fully described by a simple temperature enhancement, as they are magnetically structured regions with more complex temperature and opacity variations. In our method, these regions are approximated using a non-magnetic stellar template with an increased tempera-ture, which does not capture the full underlying physics. A more physically accurate method is the use of MURaM MHD simulations, where faculae are a natural by-product of the magnetic field injected into the simulations themselves. Estimates from the MURaM based models are dependent on mag-netic field strength and limb angle. As noted in Section 4.2, we use only 200 G models in our analysis. Activity regions predominantly emerge in belts located at mid-latitudes, as illustrated by the solar butterfly diagram (e.g., Hathaway 2015), rather than near the equator. As a result, their closest approach to disc centre is limited by their latitude. For a given heliocentric angle 𝜇 , the corresponding latitude of closest approach is given by cos −1 (𝜇 ); thus, features at latitudes of ±25 .8◦ only reach 𝜇 ∼ 0.9. This geometrical effect, combined with the limb brightening of faculae, further reduces the observable contrast of these active regions near disc centre. However, as seen in the histograms in the bottom row of Figure 8, we find that a large pro-portion of the pixels we classify as faculae sit between 𝜇 = 0.8 − 1.0,which is confirmed visually in the top panel of Figure 8. In principle, our framework was intended to also provide con-straints on the distribution of active regions as a function of limb angle, by comparing line shape changes in the spectra to those from  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator 13    

> Figure 9. Results of faculae filling-factor estimates using each synthetic stellar model in comparison to HARPS-N solar data. The markers show faculae coverage for each day as predicted by each model, with the top row showing PHOENIX results in 2016 and 2022, and the bottom row showing the respective results with MURaM. The colour bars show the best-fit temperature and best-fit 𝜇 angle for PHOENIX and MURaM, respectively. SDO derived ground truth values are shown in the blue and red dashed lines, representing no area threshold (NT) and an area threshold (T) of 2 microhemispheres, respectively.

the MURaM models. However, we are unable to track or make con-clusions surrounding the limb angle of active regions within the current modelling setup. It is possible that the disc-integrated spec-tra lack sufficient spatial information in this method to disentangle limb-dependent variations, and that the non-uniform distribution of facular regions across the solar disc further complicates the interpre-tation, as different active regions contribute unevenly to the integrated signal, effectively smearing any systematic limb-dependent trends. As a result, the filling factors presented here should be interpreted as relative indicators of solar activity rather than precise absolute measurements. Finally, in Figure 3, we see indications of the blue-to-red shift of the 4377 Å feature reported by Thompson et al. (2020). While previous studies (e.g., Thompson et al. (2017); Costes et al. (2026) have successfully extracted velocity information from multiple lines via SRA residuals, our model-derived estimates for this single feature do not show a significant velocity trend. This is likely because our model is optimized to fit the morphology of an individual spectral line, rather than providing a global estimate of the line centroid. It is likely that many of the limitations discussed in this paper arise from the reliance on an individual spectral line. Figure 10 shows residual MURaM models with spectral lines 4377 Å and 4382 Å at 

𝜇 angles of 1.0, 0.5, and 0.1, spanning from disc centre to the limb. Crucially, the amplitude of these features, as well as their relative amplitudes to one another, shifts significantly as a function of limb angle. This differential behaviour suggests that by analysing a broader suite of spectral lines with similar sensitivities, we may be able to further constrain the parameters of facular regions and improve our areal coverage estimations. Such a multi-feature approach could move these methods beyond relative indication of faculae and toward a more accurate physical representation of the solar atmosphere. 

6 CONCLUSIONS 

In this work, we present a detailed analysis of the Fe i 4377 Å line using Spectral Ratio Analysis (SRA) in combination with both PHOENIX and MURaM synthetic spectra to isolate and model the spectral signatures of solar activity. Following the approach of Thompson et al. (2017), SRA enables the construction of residual spectra that highlight the impact of activity on individual spectral features. We show that the 4377 Å line tracks solar rotation and is strongly sensitive to variations in faculae, making it a powerful diagnostic of facular activity. By fitting synthetic PHOENIX residual spectra – constructed from combinations of a quiet-Sun (G2) template and a faculae proxy – to HARPS-N observations, we are able to estimate both facular tem-perature contrasts and areal filling factors. Extending this framework to MURaM models with varying magnetic field strengths and limb angles further strengthens the physical interpretation. We find that the best estimates of faculae filling factor are given by magnetic field strengths of approximately 200 G, consistent with canonical plage values. We conclude that we are insensitive to limb angle and are limited by the use of only one spectral line. Further work should extend to more features to place further constraints on limb angle. In both approaches, the inferred filling factors show good agreement with Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) measurements, demon-strating that this approach can reliably recover the temporal evolution of facular coverage directly from disc-integrated spectra. The relative performance of the models depends on the level of  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# 14 K. L. Hobbs et al.     

> Figure 10. MURaM model residuals computed with a 1% faculae filling-factor of the 200 G injected magnetic field model. Left panel shows residuals at disc centre, middle panel shows residuals at 𝜇 =0.5, and the right panel shows residuals at the limb. These residuals highlight the change in amplitudes between the 4377 Å and 4381 Å features, showing how their relative strengths vary considerably with limb angle and, importantly, in different ways to each other.

solar activity. MURaM models outperform PHOENIX models at high activity levels, while both models offer consistent estimates in low-activity regimes. These differences likely reflect the under-lying physics of each model: PHOENIX relies primarily on tem-perature variations and does not explicitly include magnetic fields, whereas MURaM incorporates magnetic structure and is therefore better suited to reproducing spectra in magnetically active condi-tions. At the same time, PHOENIX models may offer a useful ap-proximation in quieter regimes and provide constraints on effective temperature contrasts. Overall, this work demonstrates that the Fe i 4377 Å line can be used to trace relative variations in facular filling factors in Sun-as-a-star observations, providing a direct observational pathway to monitoring stellar activity using high-resolution spectra. This line thus provides a diagnostic of activity that can be used in combination with log R ′ 

> HK

and provides a better indicator of photospheric varia-tions that imapct RV measurements. This has important implications for radial velocity exoplanet searches, where stellar activity remains a dominant source of noise, as well as for exoplanet atmosphere studies, where unocculted faculae can bias transmission spectra. However, several limitations remain. Our approach relies on a simplified parametrization of faculae, particularly in the case of PHOENIX models, where magnetic regions are approximated as temperature perturbations. Even for MURaM, the models do not fully reproduce all observed line profile features, indicating that ad-ditional physical effects, such as complex temperature gradients, ve-locity fields, or unresolved magnetic structure, may play a role. Fur-thermore, this analysis focuses on a single spectral line; extending the method to a broader set of activity-sensitive lines would provide stronger constraints and reduce degeneracies between temperature, magnetic field strength, and filling factor. Future work will therefore focus on expanding this analysis to mul-tiple spectral features, improving the physical realism of the models, and incorporating more sophisticated treatments of magnetic and radiative transfer effects. Ultimately, developing a comprehensive framework that combines multiple diagnostics will be key to robustly disentangling stellar activity from planetary signals in high-precision spectroscopic observations. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

K.L.H. is supported by a UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) Studentship (ST/X508706/1). T.R. is supported by an STFC studentship. J.C.C., C.A.W., E.dM., and M.E.Y. would like to acknowledge support from the UK Science and Technology Fa-cilities Council (STFC, grant number ST/X00094X/1). The authors also thank Harry Greatorex and Aisling O’Hare for their assistance with accessing and processing Solar Dynamics Observatory (SDO) data. AP was supported by grant PI 2102/1-1 from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG). K.S. and A.I.S. acknowledge the support from the European Research Council (ERC) under the Eu-ropean Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme through grant No. 101118581. The HARPS-N project was funded by the Prodex Program of the Swiss Space Office (SSO), the Harvard University Origin of Life Initiative (HUOLI), the Scottish Universi-ties Physics Alliance (SUPA), the University of Geneva, the Smith-sonian Astrophysical Observatory (SAO), the Italian National Astro-physical Institute (INAF), University of St. Andrews, Queen’s Univer-sity Belfast, and University of Edinburgh. This publication makes use of The Data & Analysis Center for Exoplanets (DACE), which is a fa-cility based at the University of Geneva (CH) dedicated to extrasolar planets data visualization, exchange and analysis. DACE is a platform of the Swiss National Centre of Competence in Research (NCCR) PlanetS, federating the Swiss expertise in Exoplanet research. The DACE platform is available at https://dace.unige.ch . F.R. ac-knowledges a UK Science and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) small grant ST/Y002334/1. ACC acknowledges support from STFC consolidated grant number ST/V000861/1 and UKRI/ERC Synergy Grant EP/Z000181/1 (REVEAL). The Flatiron Institute is a division of the Simons Foundation. 

DATA AVAILABILITY 

HARPS-N data are available at doi: 10.82180/dace-h4s8lp7c. These data are described in (Dumusque et al. 2026). SDO data are courtesy of NASA/SDO and the HMI science teams. PHOENIX models are available from the Göttingen Spectral Library.  

> MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)

# Fe i 4377 Å Line as a Solar Faculae Indicator 15 

REFERENCES 

Anglada-Escude G., et al., 2014, MNRAS, 443, L89 Baranne A., et al., 1996, A&AS, 119, 373 Bhatia T. S., Cameron R. H., Solanki S. K., Przybylski D. F., Witzke V., Shapiro A., Kostogryz N., 2026, A&A, 706, A308 Boisse I., Bouchy F., Hébrard G., Bonfils X., Santos N., Vauclair S., 2011, in Prasad Choudhary D., Strassmeier K. G., eds, IAU Symposium Vol. 273, Physics of Sun and Star Spots. pp 281–285 ( arXiv:1012.1452 ), doi:10.1017/S1743921311015389 Brewer J. M., et al., 2020, AJ, 160, 67 Brewer J., Zhao L., Fischer D., Llama J., Szymkowiak A., 2022, in American Astronomical Society Meeting #240. p. 434.02 Buil C., Malherbe J.-M., Maksimovic M., 2023, Photoniques, 120, 36 Burt J. A., Dumusque X., Halverson S., 2025, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2511.01954 Carlsson M., De Pontieu B., Hansteen V. H., 2019, ARA&A, 57, 189 Champeau C., 2026, JSol’Ex (astro4j) Chatzistergos T., 2017, PhD thesis, Max-Planck-Institute for Solar System Research, Lindau Claret A., 2000, A&A, 363, 1081 Clette F., Lefèvre L., 2015, SILSO Sunspot Number V2.0, https://doi.org/10.24414/qnza-ac80 Collier Cameron A., et al., 2019, MNRAS, 487, 1082 Cosentino R., et al., 2012a, in McLean I. S., Ramsay S. K., Takami H., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Confer-ence Series Vol. 8446, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IV. p. 84461V, doi:10.1117/12.925738 Cosentino R., et al., 2012b, in McLean I. S., Ramsay S. K., Takami H., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Confer-ence Series Vol. 8446, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IV. p. 84461V, doi:10.1117/12.925738 Costes J. C., et al., 2026, MNRAS, Couvidat S., et al., 2016, Sol. Phys., 291, 1887 Crass J., et al., 2021, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2107.14291 Cretignier M., Pietrow A. G. M., Aigrain S., 2024, MNRAS, 527, 2940 Dravins D., Lindegren L., Nordlund A., 1981, A&A, 96, 345 Dumusque X., Boisse I., Santos N. C., 2014, ApJ, 796, 132 Dumusque X., et al., 2015, ApJ, 814, L21 Dumusque X., et al., 2026, A&A, 706, A231 Ervin T., et al., 2022, SolAster: ’Sun-as-a-star’ radial velocity variations, Astrophysics Source Code Library, record ascl:2207.009 (ascl:2207.009) Faria J. P., et al., 2020, A&A, 635, A13 Feng F., Tuomi M., Jones H. R. A., 2017, MNRAS, 470, 4794 Finley A. J., Brun A. S., Strugarek A., Perri B., 2025, A&A, 697, A217 Fischer D. A., et al., 2016, PASP, 128, 066001 Fontenla J. M., Avrett E. H., Loeser R., 1993, ApJ, 406, 319 Fontenla J., White O. R., Fox P. A., Avrett E. H., Kurucz R. L., 1999, ApJ, 518, 480 Gehren T., Butler K., Mashonkina L., Reetz J., Shi J., 2001, A&A, 366, 981 Gilbertson C., et al., 2024, arXiv e-prints, p. arXiv:2408.17289 Gray D. F., 2005, The Observation and Analysis of Stellar Photospheres, doi:10.1017/CBO9781316036570. Gupta A. F., 2023, PhD thesis, Pennsylvania State University Gupta A. F., et al., 2021, AJ, 161, 130 Gupta A., et al., 2026, in American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts. p. 352.03 Hanassi-Savari F., Pietrow A. G. M., Druett M. K., Cretignier M., Ellwarth M., 2025, A&A, 702, A97 Hartman C. N., 2018, The Decadal Survey in Astronomy and Astrophysics 2020 (Astro 2020), NSF Award Number 1852611. Directorate for Mathe-matical and Physical Sciences, Division Of Astronomical Sciences. 2018. Hathaway D. H., 2015, Living Reviews in Solar Physics, 12, 4 Hauschildt P. H., Baron E., 1999, Journal of Computational and Applied Mathematics, 109, 41 Haywood R. D., et al., 2016, MNRAS, 457, 3637 Herrero E., Ribas I., Jordi C., Morales J. C., Perger M., Rosich A., 2016, A&A, 586, A131 Hojjatpanah S., et al., 2019, A&A, 629, A80 Huerta M., Johns-Krull C. M., Prato L., Hartigan P., Jaffe D. T., 2008, ApJ, 678, 472 Husser T. O., Wende-von Berg S., Dreizler S., Homeier D., Reiners A., Barman T., Hauschildt P. H., 2013, A&A, 553, A6 Jenkins J. S., Tuomi M., 2014, ApJ, 794, 110 Jenkins J. S., Tuomi M., Brasser R., Ivanyuk O., Murgas F., 2013, ApJ, 771, 41 Ji J., Fausey H., Bortle A., Dodson-Robinson S. E., Gizis J., 2019, in American Astronomical Society Meeting Abstracts #234. p. 109.01 John A. A., Collier Cameron A., Ford E., Shahaf S., 2021, in Posters from the TESS Science Conference II (TSC2). p. 116, doi:10.5281/zenodo.5130046 Jurgenson C., Fischer D., McCracken T., Sawyer D., Szymkowiak A., Davis A., Muller G., Santoro F., 2016, in Evans C. J., Simard L., Takami H., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for As-tronomy VI. p. 99086T ( arXiv:1606.04413 ), doi:10.1117/12.2233002 Klein B., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 531, 4238 Kontogiannis I., et al., 2025, A&A, 704, A105 Kostogryz N. M., et al., 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 929 Lakeland B. S., et al., 2024, MNRAS, 527, 7681 Langellier N., et al., 2021, AJ, 161, 287 Liang Y., Winn J. N., Melchior P., 2024, AJ, 167, 23 Lienhard F., Mortier A., Cegla H. M., Cameron A. C., Klein B., Watson C. A., 2023, MNRAS, 522, 5862 Lubin J., HPF Science 2022, in Bulletin of the American Astronomical So-ciety. p. 403.02 Luhn J. K., et al., 2023, AJ, 165, 98 Luhn J., Robertson P., Isaacson H., Holden B., 2024, in AAS/Division for Extreme Solar Systems Abstracts. p. 601.27 Meunier N., 2024, Comptes Rendus Physique, 24, 140 Meunier N., Sulis S., 2026, A&A, 707, A187 Meunier N., Desort M., Lagrange A. M., 2010, A&A, 512, A39 Mihalas D., 1978, Stellar atmospheres Milbourne T. W., et al., 2019, ApJ, 874, 107 Motalebi F., et al., 2015, A&A, 584, A72 O’Sullivan N. K., et al., 2025, MNRAS, 541, 3942 Oshagh M., Santos N. C., Ehrenreich D., Haghighipour N., Figueira P., San-terne A., Montalto M., 2014, A&A, 568, A99 Pepe F., et al., 2000, in Iye M., Moorwood A. F., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol. 4008, Optical and IR Telescope Instrumentation and Detectors. pp 582–592, doi:10.1117/12.395516 Pepe F., et al., 2002, The Messenger, 110, 9 Pepe F., et al., 2021, A&A, 645, A96 Pesnell W. D., Thompson B. J., Chamberlin P. C., 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 3 Petralia A., Maldonado J., Micela G., 2025, A&A, 694, A99 Phillips D. F., et al., 2016, in Navarro R., Burge J. H., eds, SPIE Vol. 9912, Advances in Optical and Mechanical Technologies for Telescopes and Instrumentation II. p. 99126Z, doi:10.1117/12.2232452 Pietrow A. G. M., 2026, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 9, 58273 Pietrow A. G. M., et al., 2024, A&A, 682, A46 Piskunov N. E., Kupka F., Ryabchikova T. A., Weiss W. W., Jeffery C. S., 1995, A&AS, 112, 525 Queloz D., et al., 2001, A&A, 379, 279 Rackham B. V., Apai D., Giampapa M. S., 2018, ApJ, 853, 122 Rajpaul V., Aigrain S., Osborne M. A., Reece S., Roberts S., 2015, MNRAS, 452, 2269 Rauer H., et al., 2014, Experimental Astronomy, 38, 249 Rauer H., et al., 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 26 Rempel M., 2014, ApJ, 789, 132 Ribas I., et al., 2018, Nature, 563, 365 Robertson P., Roy A., Mahadevan S., 2015, ApJ, 805, L22 Rutten R. J., 2003, Radiative Transfer in Stellar Atmospheres Ryabchikova T., Piskunov N., Kurucz R. L., Stempels H. C., Heiter U., Pakho-mov Y., Barklem P. S., 2015, Phys. Scr., 90, 054005 Santos N. C., et al., 2014, A&A, 566, A35 MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026) 16 K. L. Hobbs et al. 

Scherrer P. H., et al., 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 207 Schou J., et al., 2012, Sol. Phys., 275, 229 Schrijver C. J., 2020, ApJ, 890, 121 Schrijver C. J., Harvey K. L., 1994, Sol. Phys., 150, 1 Schüssler M., Vögler A., 2008, A&A, 481, L5 Schwab C., et al., 2016, in Evans C. J., Simard L., Takami H., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VI. p. 99087H, doi:10.1117/12.2234411 Sowmya K., Shapiro A. I., Witzke V., Nèmec N.-E., Chatzistergos T., Yeo K. L., Krivova N. A., Solanki S. K., 2021, ApJ, 914, 21 Sowmya K., Shapiro A. I., Rouppe van der Voort L. H. M., Krivova N. A., Solanki S. K., 2023, ApJ, 956, L10 Sowmya K., Shapiro A. I., Vasilyev V., Witzke V., Collier Cameron A., Solanki S. K., 2026, ApJ, 1003, 28 Spruit H. C., 1976, Sol. Phys., 50, 269 Tabernero H. M., et al., 2021, A&A, 646, A158 Thompson S. J., et al., 2016, in Evans C. J., Simard L., Takami H., eds, Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series Vol. 9908, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy VI. p. 99086F ( arXiv:1608.04611 ), doi:10.1117/12.2232111 Thompson A. P. G., Watson C. A., de Mooij E. J. W., Jess D. B., 2017, MNRAS, 468, L16 Thompson A. P. G., et al., 2020, MNRAS, 494, 4279 Unruh Y. C., Solanki S. K., Fligge M., 1999, A&A, 345, 635 Váradi Nagy P., Pietrow A. G. M., 2025, RNAAS, 9, 188 Vernazza J. E., Avrett E. H., Loeser R., 1981, ApJS, 45, 635 Vögler A., Schüssler M., 2007, A&A, 465, L43 Vögler A., Shelyag S., Schüssler M., Cattaneo F., Emonet T., Linde T., 2005, A&A, 429, 335 Witzke V., et al., 2021, A&A, 653, A65 Witzke V., Shapiro A. I., Kostogryz N. M., Cameron R., Rackham B. V., Seager S., Solanki S. K., Unruh Y. C., 2022, ApJ, 941, L35 Witzke V., et al., 2024, A&A, 681, A81 Zhao Y., Dumusque X., 2023, A&A, 671, A11 Zhao L. L., et al., 2022, AJ, 163, 171 Zhao Y., Dumusque X., Cretignier M., Al Moulla K., Ellwarth M., Reiners A., Sozzetti A., 2025, A&A, 693, A262 

APPENDIX A: 4377 Å FEATURE AT ALL LIMB ANGLES 

In Figure A1, we show the MURaM models for each limb angle, focused on the 4377Å feature. 

APPENDIX B: FACULAE COVERAGE VERSUS TEMPERATURE 

In Figure B1, we show the reduced 𝜒 2maps for the PHOENIX model fits for two example days. 

This paper has been typeset from a TEX/L ATEX file prepared by the author. 

Figure A1. MURaM models focused on the 4377 Å feature at all limb angles. Angles closer to disc centre give a trough before the feature that is not present moving towards the limb. 

Figure B1. Reduced 𝜒 2 map of faculae coverage versus temperature derived from PHOENIX models for example days 2016-07-17 (top) and 2022-07-16 (bottom). The colour bar shows the 𝜒 2 value of each pairing of faculae coverage and temperature, with darker blue representing a lower value and therefore better fit. The best-fitting models for the two days are indicated by the white stars. MNRAS 000 , 1–16 (2026)