Title: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets: applications to Ross 128 b

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.03857v1

Published Time: Wed, 05 Aug 2026 01:27:21 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
Astronomy & Astrophysics manuscript no. aanda_revised ©ESO 2026 August 5, 2026 

# A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets: applications to Ross 128 b 

Mathilde Houelle 1, 2, Emeline Bolmont 1, 2, Christophe Lovis 1, 2, Martin Turbet 3, 4, Guillaume Chaverot 2, 5, Alexandre Mechineau 4, and Jérémy Leconte 4 

> 1

Observatoire de Genève, Université de Genève, Chemin Pegasi 51, 1290 Versoix, Switzerland  

> 2

Centre pour la Vie dans l’Univers, Université de Genève, 1211 Geneva, Switzerland e-mail: mathilde.houelle@unige.ch  

> 3

Laboratoire de Météorologie Dynamique /IPSL, CNRS, Sorbonne Université, École Normale Supérieure, PSL Research University, École Polytechnique, Institut Poytechnique de Paris, 75005 Paris, France  

> 4

Laboratoire d’Astrophysique de Bordeaux, Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, B18N, allée Geo ff roy Saint-Hilaire, 33615 Pessac, France  

> 5

Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, IPAG, 38000 Grenoble, France August 5, 2026 

ABSTRACT 

The upcoming instruments VLT /RISTRETTO, ELT /ANDES and ELT /PCS will soon enable atmospheric characterization of the expanding population of non-transiting, small, rocky exoplanets orbiting closer than the inner edge of the Habitable Zone around M dwarf stars. This advancement is made possible thanks to the combination of high-contrast imaging and high-resolution spec-troscopy in reflected light. A critical parameter for reflected-light observability is the wavelength-dependent reflectivity, which is strongly influenced by climate, surface and atmospheric properties. The objective of this work is to refine the predictions of the spec-tral reflectivity for this population of planets. Using Ross 128 b as a prototype, we aim to provide physically consistent geometric albedo estimates within the RISTRETTO and ANDES spectral ranges across diverse atmospheric scenarios. Using the Generic Plan-etary Climate Model, we perform 3D climate simulations of Ross 128 b under varying atmospheric compositions, surface pressures, water inventories and spin-orbit resonances to investigate the potential climate regimes of the planet. Then, we compute synthetic reflectance spectra with the radiative transfer code Pytmosph3R to assess spectral signatures for each scenario and discuss the planet detectability and instrument capacity for constraining the climate. The results show that hazeless rocky planets receiving stellar ir-radiations similar to Ross 128 b exhibit rather low reflectivity, with geometric albedos ranging from 0.07 to 0.2 in the RISTRETTO bandpass and from 0 to 0.14 in the ANDES bandpass across all simulated scenarios. This low reflectivity can result from the lack of clouds or surface ice deposits on the dayside or from a strong atmospheric absorption due to high water vapor concentrations, depend-ing on the parameter configurations. These climate features are characteristic of the climate moist bistability in close-in planets with low water reservoirs investigated in previous studies. Our results suggest that arbitrary albedo assumptions, such as the commonly adopted 0.3 Earth-like value, can overestimate the reflectivity for this specific planet population when assessing detection limits. This highlights the importance of using more accurate climate models, as done in this study, to improve the reflectivity predictions, better assess the planet detectability and optimize the preparation of future observations with next-generation high-resolution spectrographs. 

Key words. planets and satellites: terrestrial planets – planets and satellites: atmospheres – techniques: high angular resolution – techniques: spectroscopic 

1. Introduction 

The atmospheric characterization of small, rocky exoplanets is now possible through instruments such as the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST). Since 2022, this space-based mission has enabled the first observations of rocky planets, including those within the TRAPPIST-1 system (Gillon et al. 2016; Gillon et al. 2017), using transmission spectroscopy (Piaulet-Ghorayeb et al. 2025; Espinoza et al. 2025; Glidden et al. 2025) and thermal emission measurements (Greene et al. 2023; Zieba et al. 2023; Gillon et al. 2025). Statistical analyses from detection missions like Kepler reveal that small exoplanets with radii between 1 and 4 R⊕ are particularly prevalent, with over 50% of Sun-like stars hosting at least one planet within this size range (Batalha et al. 2013; Petigura et al. 2013; Fulton & Petigura 2018; He et al. 2019). Moreover, due to observational biases, many super-Earth and Earth-mass planets are detected in short-period orbits around M dwarf stars (Dressing & Charbonneau 2015; Mignon et al. 2025). This results in a considerable population of close-in, rocky exoplanets that are relatively highly irradiated and likely tidally locked. However, several factors limit the atmospheric characteriza-tion of rocky planets around M dwarf stars with transmission and emission spectroscopy. First, stellar contamination (especially the transit light source e ff ect with the presence of spots and facu-lae in the stellar photosphere) can impact the observed transmis-sion spectrum and limit reliable detections of atmospheric sig-natures (e.g., Rackham et al. 2019), as observed for TRAPPIST-1 b (Lim et al. 2023). Second, our limited understanding of stel-lar spectra constrains atmospheric retrievals based on emission spectroscopy (Fauchez et al. 2025a). Finally, both techniques of transmission and emission spectroscopy are currently restricted to transiting exoplanets. The combination of high-contrast imaging and high-resolution spectroscopy in reflected light (Snellen et al. 2015; Lovis et al. 2017) is an alternative technique expected to enable 

Article number, page 1 of 24 arXiv:2608.03857v1 [astro-ph.EP] 4 Aug 2026 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised 

atmospheric characterization of nearby non-transiting exoplan-ets previously inaccessible with existing methods. This new ap-proach will be employed by RISTRETTO (Lovis et al. 2022, 2024; Bugatti et al. 2025) on the Very Large Telescope (VLT) from 2030, pathfinder instrument for ANDES (Marconi et al. 2022; Palle et al. 2025) and PCS (Kasper et al. 2021), planned on the forthcoming Extremely Large Telescope (ELT) from 2035 and 2040, respectively. RISTRETTO (high-resolution integral-field spectrograph for the tomography of resolved exoplanets through timely observations) is a pioneering instrument integrat-ing extreme adaptive optics with high-resolution spectroscopy in the visible spectral range. Among other science cases, the spectrograph will particularly focus on Proxima Centauri b, the closest known exoplanet to Earth (Anglada-Escudé et al. 2016). Proxima b will also be observed with ANDES (armazones high dispersion echelle spectrograph), along with other promising nearby targets with smaller angular separations, referred to as the golden sample (Palle et al. 2025). ANDES and PCS (planetary camera and spectrograph) are expected to reach unprecedented angular resolutions with an inner working angle of 20 mas (al-lowing the observation of a larger number of targets), achieve higher spectral resolutions ( R = 100 000), significantly decrease integration times and broaden the spectral coverage across the entire visible and near-infrared. An important initial step involves assessing the detectability of the targets using current and upcoming observational capa-bilities. Two key aspects to consider are (1) the planet-to-star contrast ratio (i.e., ratio of the reflected flux from the planet to the stellar flux) and (2) the angular separation from the host star. Figure 1 illustrates the estimated detectability of the currently known rocky exoplanets discovered through radial velocity (RV) and transit methods. The di ff raction limit of the ELT, defined by the 39-metre-diameter primary mirror, limits the detectability of planets with angular separations smaller than 10 mas. The con-trast ratios are estimated assuming a geometric albedo of 0.3 for each planet. 

Fig. 1: Estimated detectability of the currently known (RV and transiting) rocky exoplanets, with estimated masses below 5 M⊕

and radii below 1.7 R⊕. The masses are estimated assuming a most probable orbital inclination of 60 ◦ and the radii are com-puted using the empirical mass-radius relationship from Parc et al. (2024). The contrast ratios are estimated assuming a geo-metric albedo of 0.3 and planets are assumed at maximum elon-gation. The maximum angular separations come from NASA Exoplanet Archive. The ELT di ff raction limit and the approxi-mate detection limits of RISTRETTO, ANDES and PCS are de-picted in the figure. The geometric albedo is a key parameter influencing target detectability. However, despite the expected diversity among the targets, studies generally rely on unique and arbitrary albedo assumptions to estimate contrast ratios and required exposure times, commonly using the 0.3 Earth-like albedo assumption (Madden & Kaltenegger 2018) such as in Figure 1. In this study, we aim to provide more robust and physically consistent esti-mates of the planet spectral reflectivity by taking atmospheric and surface properties into account. Given that the planetary albedo is strongly influenced by the climate, the most e ff ective approach is to perform climate simulations to explore the po-tential climate regimes. Moreover, the climate is governed by a broader set of parameters beyond stellar irradiation and orbital distance, notably including the atmospheric composition, which currently remains largely unknown. Therefore, such simulations need to be conducted across a wide range of orbital and atmo-spheric configurations, to refine the predictions and better pre-pare the future observations by providing a wide grid of potential atmospheric scenarios. Historical methods for climate studies used 1D single-column climate models (Kasting 1988). Although these models provide reasonable estimates for planets with fast rotations and dense atmospheres, they are limited when applied to planets with synchronous or slow rotations (e.g., Yang et al. 2013), such as expected for those orbiting close to their host stars, or even plan-ets with Earth-like rotations (e.g., Leconte et al. 2013a). This is because they are unable to consistently represent the three-dimensional processes of the atmosphere, including global cir-culation patterns and cloud distribution. For albedo estimations, clouds especially are a first-order factor influencing the results. In such cases, 3D global climate models (GCMs) are essen-tial for accurately simulating energy redistribution, temperature variations and mean planetary temperatures, for both Earth-like rotations (e.g., Leconte et al. 2013a), and slow or synchronous rotations (e.g., Yang et al. 2013, 2014; Way et al. 2016; Koppa-rapu et al. 2017; Turbet et al. 2021). Incorporating this complex-ity is vital for deriving physically grounded albedo values across various planetary configurations, and also assessing the poten-tial detectability of spectral features for each scenario, as done in Leconte et al. (2013b); Turbet et al. (2016); Wolf et al. (2019); Fauchez et al. (2025b). GCMs have been used to investigate the climate and poten-tial habitability of Proxima b (e.g., Turbet et al. 2016; Boutle et al. 2017; Del Genio et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2020). Accord-ing to the current definitions of the Habitable Zone (HZ), which is defined as the circumstellar region where surface water could be sustained in its liquid form (Kasting et al. 1993; Kopparapu et al. 2013, 2014, 2016, 2017), Proxima b is most likely located within the HZ of its host star. This assessment is based on the measured stellar e ff ective temperature, stellar luminosity and or-bital distance of Proxima b, that we summarized in Table 1, but is also supported by the GCM studies. In comparison, most other planets within the golden sample of ANDES are located closer to their host star than the inner boundary of the HZ, according to the definitions of Kopparapu et al. (2017) and Turbet et al. (2023) for synchronously rotating planets. More accurate stud-ies of these planets with GCMs can help to better understand their climate and atmospheric processes, which can also inform the criteria defining the inner edge of the HZ. This study focuses on the ANDES target Ross 128 b (Bonfils et al. 2018), which is the second closest known rocky exoplanet to Earth, discovered via the RV method. With a stellar irradi-ation of 1.5 S ⊕ (see Table 1), Ross 128 b is closer to its star than the inner edge of the HZ as defined by Kopparapu et al. 

> Article number, page 2 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

(2017), which corresponds to ∼1.25 S ⊕ for the e ff ective temper-ature of Ross 128. Moreover, with a maximum angular separa-tion of 14.7 mas, Ross 128 b is beyond the detection limits of RISTRETTO and ANDES, as shown in Figure 1. However, it remains a potential target for PCS, which aims to operate also in the visible and may achieve the required contrast and separa-tion for a direct characterization. Since Ross 128 b is the most irradiated object in the ANDES golden sample and has the small-est angular separation, we consider this target as a representative case study for both currently and potentially future confirmed ex-oplanets within the population of small, rocky exoplanets located closer than the inner edge of the HZ, including the remaining targets of the golden sample such as GJ 273 b (Astudillo-Defru et al. 2017) or Wolf 1061 c (Wright et al. 2016). Table 1: Stellar e ff ective temperature, stellar luminosity, semi-major axis, stellar irradiation and maximum angular separation values of Proxima b and Ross 128 b. Proxima b (1) Ross 128 b (2) 

Teff (K) 2980 (3) 3192 (4) 

L (L⊙) 0.00151 (3) 0.00362 (4) 

a (AU) 0.04848 (5) 0.0496 (2) 

S (S ⊕) 0.64 1.5 

θ (mas) 37.3 14.7   

> Notes. The angular separations come from Palle et al. (2025).
> References. (1) Anglada-Escudé et al. (2016); (2) Bonfils et al. (2018); (3) Ribas et al. (2017); (4) Mann et al. (2015); (5) Suárez Mascareño et al. (2025).

The objective of this study is to provide a more robust and accurate assessment of the spectral reflectivity of small, rocky exoplanets located closer than the inner edge of the Habitable Zone of M dwarf stars. Applying our methodology (detailed in Section 2) on Ross 128 b, we first investigate in Section 3 the po-tential climate regimes of the planet using a GCM, by exploring the impact of a broad range of parameters (orbital configurations, atmospheric compositions, surface pressures and water invento-ries) on the climate. Then, we provide in Section 4 new geomet-ric albedo estimates and analyze potential observable signatures for each scenario. The updated geometric albedo estimates can improve the accuracy of target detectability and better inform the future reflected-light observations with next-generation ground-based high-resolution spectrographs such as RISTRETTO, AN-DES and PCS. 

2. Method 

> 2.1. Modeling the climate by varying multiple critical planetary parameters

The climate simulations are performed using the Generic Plane-tary Climate Model (Generic-PCM, previously known as LMD-Generic), which is a 3D GCM developed to simulate a diverse range of planetary atmospheres, readily applicable to exoplanets (Wordsworth et al. 2010, 2011; Selsis et al. 2011; Leconte et al. 2013b; Bolmont et al. 2016; Turbet et al. 2016, 2018; Fauchez et al. 2019). Based on fundamental hydrodynamic and thermo-dynamic equations, the model solves the primitive equations of geophysical fluid dynamics using the 3D dynamical core of the LMDz 3D General Circulation Model (Hourdin et al. 2006), originally developed to study the climate of the Earth. We conducted the GCM simulations using the physical pa-rameters of the Ross 128 system, detailed in Table 2. The star is an M dwarf with an e ff ective temperature of 3192 K and a lu-minosity of 0.00362 L⊙ (Mann et al. 2015). The stellar spectral data used for the simulations were computed using the BT-Settl model grid of theoretical spectra (Rajpurohit et al. 2013), con-sidering Teff = 3200 K, log g = 5 dex and [Fe /H] = 0 dex for the stellar e ff ective temperature, surface gravity and metal-licity, respectively (Mann et al. 2015; Souto et al. 2018). The planet rotates around the star in 9.86 days with a semi-major axis of 0.0496 AU (Bonfils et al. 2018). The measured stellar lumi-nosity and semi-major axis give a received stellar irradiation of about 2009 W m −2, which is ∼1.5 times the solar flux received by the Earth. The projected mass Mp sin i is 1.35 M⊕ (Bonfils et al. 2018). The planetary mass considered for the simulations (1.56 M⊕) is calculated assuming that the orbital inclination of the system is 60 ◦, which is the median value for a random dis-tribution of orbital inclinations. The planetary radius (1.13 R⊕)and gravity field (12 m s −2) are derived assuming that the planet has an Earth-like rocky composition (Souto et al. 2018; Zeng et al. 2019; Parc et al. 2024). Given the uncertainties regard-ing planetary surface properties and internal composition, we adopt the simplest assumption of a homogenous, rock surface, as used in Turbet et al. (2016). Each simulation is initialized with a flat surface, with a surface albedo of 0.2 and a thermal iner-tia of 1000 J m −2 K−1 s−1/2. This surface albedo assumption is consistent with Earth-based studies (Pierrehumbert 2010; Roc-cetti et al. 2024, 2025), and observations of airless solar system bodies (Buratti et al. 1996; Mallama 2017) and rocky exoplanets (Greene et al. 2023; Zieba et al. 2023, 2026). Moreover, darken-ing processes such as space weathering (Cassidy & Hapke 1975; Pieters & Noble 2016) support the assumption of a low-albedo planetary surface. The spatial grid used for the simulations has a resolution of 64 × 48 × 30 in longitude, latitude and altitude, respectively. An initial temperature profile of 300 K is uniformly assigned across all atmospheric grid columns. We fix the mean atmospheric sur-face pressure at 0.1, 1 or 10 bars, depending on the simulation setup (presented below). 

> 2.1.1. Orbital configurations

Given that Ross 128 b orbits close to its host star, we initially as-sumed a circular orbit ( e = 0), a synchronous rotation (1:1 spin-orbit resonance) and zero obliquity. This is consistent with the final stage of a two-body tidal evolution, which tends to (1) syn-chronize the rotation and orbital periods, (2) align the planet spin axis perpendicularly to the orbit and (3) damp the eccentricity to zero. However, this state can be reached over timescales poten-tially longer than the lifetime of the system. Moreover, non-zero eccentricities can facilitate capture into higher order resonances, which can delay the evolution towards the synchronous state, and induce high obliquities instead of damping to zero (Valente & Correia 2022). For the specific case of Ross 128 b, Valente & Correia (2022) showed that eccentricities of 0.09 and 0.16 can respectively lead to capture into 5:2 and 7:2 spin-orbit reso-nances and obliquities of 79 ◦ and 66 ◦. These high obliquity con-figurations can be maintained over several gigayears (10 Gyr), potentially exceeding the estimated age of Ross 128, which is of the order of a few gigayears (Newton et al. 2016). To analyze the impact of the synchronous and asynchronous rotations on the planetary climate and their implications for ob-servability, we conducted the simulations for two di ff erent sets  

> Article number, page 3 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

of spin-orbit resonances, eccentricities and obliquities (see also Table 2): 

– 1:1 spin-orbit resonance, 0 eccentricity, 0 ◦ obliquity 

– 5:2 spin-orbit resonance, 0.09 eccentricity, 79 ◦ obliquity The orbital parameters significantly influence the planetary cli-mate, as the stellar irradiation distribution across the plane-tary surface is governed by the rotation period and obliquity (Milankovitch 1941). Therefore, the climate regime of a syn-chronously rotating planet, characterized by permanent dayside and nightside, substantially di ff ers from a planet with an asyn-chronous rotation. Moreover, planets with high eccentricities induce important temporal variations in the stellar irradiation, thereby limiting the assumption of the mean flux approxima-tion, although this approximation should hold for a planet like Ross 128 b (Bolmont et al. 2016). These orbital parameter vari-ations are critical for assessing the planetary climate and habit-ability. Table 2: Stellar and planetary characteristics of the Ross 128 sys-tem considered for the simulations. Stellar parameters (1 ,2) 

Eff ective temperature, Teff (K) 3192 Luminosity, L (L⊙) 0.00362 Mass, M⋆ (M⊙) 0.168 Radius, R⋆ (R⊙) 0.1967 Surface gravity, log g 5Metallicity, [Fe /H] 0Planetary parameters Orbital period, P (days) 9.86 (3) 

Semi-major axis, a (AU) 0.0496 (3) 

Stellar irradiation, S (W m −2) 2009 Projected mass, Mp sin i (M⊕) 1.35 (3) 

Mass, Mp (M⊕) 1.56 *

Radius, Rp (R⊕) 1.13 *

Gravity, gp (m s −2) 12 *

Spin-orbit resonance 1:1 /5:2 ** 

Obliquity ( ◦) 0/79 ** 

Eccentricity, e 0/0.09 ** 

Rotation rate, Ω (rad s −1) 7.4 × 10 −6/1.8 × 10 −5

Assumed surface parameters Type Rock Albedo, Asurf 0.2 Thermal inertia (J m −2 K−1 s−1/2) 1000 Topography Flat          

> Notes. (*)The planetary mass, radius and gravity are calculated un-der the assumptions of an orbital inclination i=60 ◦and a bulk den-sity consistent with an Earth-like rocky composition. (** )Two di ff erent orbital configurations are considered for this study. The asynchronous case (5:2) and its related eccentricity and obliquity come from Valente & Correia (2022).
> References. (1) Mann et al. (2015); (2) Souto et al. (2018); (3) Bonfils et al. (2018).

2.1.2. Atmospheric compositions 

In our simulations, we consider atmospheres dominated by N 2

and CO 2. The choice of N 2-dominated atmospheres is based on the prevalence of N 2 as a common constituent in secondary at-mospheres (Forget & Leconte 2014; Maurice et al. 2024) and motivated by examples in the solar system, such as the Earth and Titan. The choice of a CO 2-dominated atmosphere is sup-ported by planetary formation models showing that atmospheres of low-mass rocky exoplanets are likely to evolve as CO 2-rich environments (Hu et al. 2012b; Bower et al. 2025). Also, analo-gous cases of planets with CO 2-dominated atmospheres exist in the solar system, such as Venus and Mars. More specifically, we consider three di ff erent mixtures of at-mospheric gases: 

– H2O + N2

– H2O + N2 + 376 ppm CO 2 (Earth-like composition) 

– H2O + CO 2

The di ff erent atmospheric setups used in the simulations are summarized in Table 3. The radiative transfer is computed using correlated-k tables from Chaverot et al. (2022) for the mixture of H 2O + N2, Leconte et al. (2013a) for the Earth-like composi-tion and Turbet et al. (2019) for the mixture of H 2O + CO 2. The correlated-k tables include spectral bands for the thermal emis-sion (IR) and visible wavelengths. For the H 2O + N2 mixture, the spectral resolution is 58 for the IR and 28 for the visible, whereas for both Earth-like and H 2O + CO 2 mixtures, the IR and visible resolutions are 58 and 28, respectively. The opacity due to N 2-N 2

collision-induced absorption (CIA) is accounted and come from the HITRAN CIA database (Karman et al. 2019). The simula-tions include also the H 2O-H 2O and H 2O-air continua (Mlawer et al. 2012). The correlated-k table for H 2O + CO 2 also includes the opacity due to the CO 2-CO 2 continua. Water is treated as a condensable gas, thus the water vapor pressure varies during the simulations. Water can exist in its va-por and condensed phases, in the atmosphere (gas), in clouds and on the surface (liquid and ice). The transport, pressure vari-ations and phase transitions of water are computed following the water cycle scheme described in Leconte et al. (2013a). For the cloud formation, water (liquid or ice, depending on the temper-ature) can condense on cloud condensation nuclei (CCN). A de-tailed description of the cloud formation scheme can be found in Leconte et al. (2013a). In our CO 2-dominated atmospheres, we also allow CO 2 condensing into ice at the surface and on CCNs. For all cloud particles (liquid water, water ice and CO 2

ice), we keep the number of CCN per unit mass of moist air fixed at 10 5 kg −1, and the CCN radii variable. 

2.1.3. Water inventories 

In the model, the initial global water amount can be numerically finite (limited water amount on the surface and /or in the atmo-sphere) or infinite (ocean with or without heat transport). The presence of a large water reservoir such as an ocean on a planet receiving a stellar irradiation similar to Ross 128 b would lead the climate to the runaway greenhouse state (Kopparapu et al. 2017; Turbet et al. 2023). The runaway greenhouse is a state where all available water is vaporized in the atmosphere and the lower atmosphere becomes optically thick, leading to extremely high surface temperatures. This will be further discussed in Sec-tion 5. Thus, here we initialized the simulations with limited wa-ter reservoirs (initially as water vapor in the atmosphere), with varying global water amounts for each atmospheric setup (in-cluding dry conditions). For the setups under dry conditions, the correlated-k tables used for the radiative transfer computations include a tiny amount of water, which has a negligible impact on the GCM results, but may a ff ect the computed spectra. 

> Article number, page 4 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

Table 3: Setups of atmospheric gas compositions and surface pressures considered in the simulations. Case * N2 pressure CO 2 pressure H2O pressure ** 

1 0.1 bar - variable 2 1 bar - variable 3 10 bars - variable 4 1 bar 376 ppm variable 5 - 0.1 bar variable 6 - 1 bar variable 7 - 10 bars variable     

> Notes. (*)Most cases involve multiple global water inventory scenarios, including dry scenarios. For Case 2 specifically, we define three sub-cases characterized by distinct water contents, denoted as Cases 2A, 2B and 2C, with specific values to be detailed in Section 3. (** )As water is treated as a condensable gas in each gas mixture, the water vapor pressure can vary during the simulations.

2.2. Computing the reflectance spectra 

2.2.1. Description of Pytmosph3R 

Pytmosph3R (Caldas et al. 2019; Falco et al. 2022) allows pro-cessing Generic-PCM simulation outputs to generate synthetic observables, including transmission and emission spectra, at a di ff erent resolution than the simulation. In this study, the code is used to produce phase curves that take into account the sur-face albedo and the incident stellar flux. The phase curves are computed using high-resolution opacity data binned down at a lower spectral resolution, which remains higher than the reso-lution of the correlated-k tables used in the Generic-PCM. The spectral resolutions of the correlated-k tables adapted for Pytmo-sph3R are R = 300 for the H 2O + N2 gas mixture, and R = 500 for the Earth-like and H 2O + CO 2 tables. The H 2O-H 2O and H2O-N 2 continua and CIA spectral data are also included. Pyt-mosph3R computes the emission spectrum by seeing the 3D at-mosphere as a 2D grid of independent atmospheric columns, using the latitude-longitude discretization of the Generic-PCM outputs. By extension, the phase curves are a collection of emis-sion spectra at di ff erent orbital phases. The spectrum of each atmospheric column is computed using exo_k (Leconte 2021), a library allowing to solve the radiative transfer equations for a 1D atmospheric column, based on Toon et al. (1989) and using a two-stream approximation (Meador & Weaver 1980). An e ff ec-tive angle μ0 is used, which represents how the line of sight of the observer probes the atmosphere. The algorithm from (Toon et al. 1989) allows to specify a source term to treat the stellar flux as a collimated beam with an independent e ff ective angle μ⋆.The proper μ⋆ and μ0 are obtained from the observing geometry (from the observer and star positions and the latitude /longitude coordinates of the columns). The surface albedo is also specified. The spectrum seen by the observer is then computed by perform-ing a weighted sum of the spectra of each column. The weights take into account the surface of the columns and their e ff ective surface for the observer. This method allows taking into account the geometric e ff ects of the stellar illumination and the surface albedo. 

2.2.2. Computing the geometric albedo 

The wavelength-dependent planet-to-star contrast ratio at phase angle α is given by 

C(λ, α ) = Ag(λ) g(α) Rp

a

!2

, (1) where C(λ, α ) is the ratio of the reflected spectrum at phase an-gle α to the stellar spectrum, Ag(λ) is the geometric albedo spec-trum, g(α) is the phase function defining the scattering proper-ties of the planet (from the surface and the atmosphere), Rp is the planet radius and a is the orbital semi-major axis. The phase angle α is defined as cos α = − sin i cos ϕ, with i the orbital incli-nation angle and ϕ the orbital phase, defined as zero at inferior conjunction, as shown in Figure 2. For i = 60 ◦, the phase angle of a planet at orbital phase ϕ = 180 ◦ is α = 30 ◦.

Fig. 2: Top: Orbital phases ϕ as seen from the observer for a planet with an orbital inclination i of 60 ◦. Bottom: Illustration of the orbital phase ϕ, orbital inclination i and phase angle α (for the same inclination i = 60 ◦). The red line indicates the observed latitude (30 ◦) corresponding to an inclination i of 60 ◦.The contrast ratio is computed with Pytmosph3R for all sim-ulated scenarios. Then, we derive the geometric albedo spectra, defined as the ratio of the planet reflectivity at specific wave-lengths under full illumination to that of an idealized fully re-flecting Lambertian disk of equal radius. We use the phase func-tion of a Lambertian spherical planet, which is given by 

g(α) = sin α + (π − α) cos απ . (2) This is a valid approximation for planets dominated by isotropic scattering (like Rayleigh scattering). For a perfectly reflecting Lambertian spherical surface, Ag = 2/3.  

> Article number, page 5 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

This study focuses on the spectral ranges pertinent to RISTRETTO and ANDES. RISTRETTO will operate within the visible (0 .62 − 0.84 μm), whereas the single conjugate adaptive optics (SCAO) of ANDES will cover the Y, J and H near-infrared spectral bands, defined in Table 4. We will compute the mean geometric albedo over the RISTRETTO and YJH spectral bands for all scenarios considered in this study. Table 4: Spectral ranges of RISTRETTO and the YJH bands of ANDES considered for mean geometric albedo computations. Bandpass Spectral range ( μm) RISTRETTO 0.62 − 0.84 Y band 0.95 − 1.13 J band 1.12 − 1.36 H band 1.41 − 1.80 

3. Potential climate regimes of Ross 128 b 

This section focuses on the interpretation of the di ff erent climate regimes obtained from the GCM simulations of Ross 128 b. We begin by defining three scenarios (designated as Cases 2A, 2B and 2C), all simulating a planet with a synchronous rotation, an atmosphere of N 2 and a mean surface pressure of 1 bar (corre-sponding to Case 2 as specified in Table 3), but with three dis-tinct initial global water inventories. In this study, we express the total planetary water inventory in global equivalent layer (GEL), which represents the depth of a hypothetical global surface wa-ter layer assuming that all available water is in liquid form. For reference, Venus has an estimated water content of ∼2 cm GEL, while the total water content of the Earth is around 3 km GEL. In this work, we adopt an order of magnitude closer to Venus. The total water inventories in our three cases are approximately: 

– 6 cm GEL (Case 2A) 

– 8.3 cm GEL (Case 2B) 

– 83.3 cm GEL (Case 2C) We first focus on Case 2B, where the atmospheric circula-tion regime, and water distribution and evolution are discussed in detail in Section 3.1. From this case (arbitrarily designated as the baseline reference) we explore the impact of varying di ff er-ent parameters on the climate of Ross 128 b. Section 3.2 dis-cusses the e ff ect of varying the initial water inventory on the climate by comparing Cases 2A, 2B and 2C. From this analysis, we will define the climate regimes of the three cases and will refer to them in the rest of this paper. Then, Section 3.3 inves-tigates the influence of the atmospheric composition on the cli-mate; Section 3.4 analyzes the e ff ects of the atmospheric surface pressure; and Section 3.5 compares scenarios with synchronous and asynchronous rotations. Finally, an overview of the results is presented in Section 3.6 and summarized in Figure 8. 

> 3.1. Description of the reference case
> 3.1.1. Circulation regime

In this section, we discuss the atmospheric circulation regime for Case 2B. Figure 3 presents the maps of temperature and winds at the surface and at a higher atmospheric level corresponding to a pressure of 0.5 bar. The maps corresponding to Case 2B are shown in panels b and e; therefore, this section focuses on these panels. At the surface, Figure 3 (panel b) shows a clear temperature dichotomy between the dayside and the nightside. This pattern is characteristic of a planet in synchronous rotation, with per-manent hot dayside and cold nightside. This results in a high day /night thermal contrast of ∼152 K, inducing a convergence of surface winds at the hottest point of the surface and an up-welling towards higher altitudes. On the nightside near the west-ern terminator and at symmetric positions around latitudes (ap-proximately −45 ◦ and +45 ◦), the surface map exhibits two cold regions with temperatures low enough to enable atmospheric wa-ter vapor to condense into liquid phase at the surface. At higher altitudes, Figure 3 (panel e) reveals a more ho-mogeneous temperature distribution, with a temperature contrast of ∼32 K, and again two colder regions at mid-latitudes on the nightside in both hemispheres. The map also displays antisym-metric cyclonic vortex structures over the colder regions, and strong eastward equatorial winds (up to ∼90 m s −1), leading to a slight eastward shift of the hottest point from the substellar point. These circulation features (also described in Leconte et al. 2013b) are characteristic of synchronously rotating rocky plan-ets with relatively fast rotation rate, as shown in previous GCM studies of tidally locked exoplanets (e.g., Koll & Abbot 2016; Yang et al. 2019; Hammond et al. 2020). The climate and at-mospheric circulation of such planets are driven by the fixed day /night radiative heating contrast, which generates the for-mation of stationary, atmospheric planetary waves (Kelvin and Rossby waves), as described by the Matsuno-Gill response pat-tern (Matsuno 1966; Gill 1980; Showman & Polvani 2011; Showman et al. 2013). In the case of fast rotating planets (thus with strong Coriolis force), the Kelvin waves can induce trans-port of eastward momentum from mid-latitudes toward the equa-tor, leading to the formation of a super-rotating equatorial jet (as observed in our simulations, see Figure 3, panel e). Form-ing on the western side of the substellar point and propagating westward, the Rossby waves can create cyclonic gyres at mid-latitudes both in the northern and southern hemispheres (Fig-ure 3, panel e), referred to as Rossby-wave gyres. The circulation regime of tidally locked planets can be de-termined by the ratio of the equatorial Rossby deformation ra-dius LRo (i.e., characteristic length scale at which the Corio-lis force, and thus the planet rotation, starts to significantly af-fect atmospheric dynamics) and the planetary radius Rp. There-fore, Case 2B is consistent with the Matsuno-Gill circulation regime expected for a synchronously rotating rocky planet with 

LRo ≈ Rp, which is characterized by the presence of a planet-wide equatorial jet and Rossby-wave gyres. We checked and quantified the e ff ect of the rotation rate of Ross 128 b on its atmospheric circulation by calculating the equatorial Rossby de-formation length, defined as LRo /Rp. The calculations are de-tailed in Appendix A, where we find that LRo /Rp ≈ 1 for N 2 and CO 2-dominated atmospheres and for a diverse range of temper-atures, confirming our conclusions. However, given that the radius of Ross 128 b is not directly measured as the planet was discovered via the RV method, we calculated the equatorial Rossby deformation length with the as-sumed value of Rp in Table 2. Assuming an Earth-like rocky composition, the actual planetary radius may vary depending on the true orbital inclination of the system, which could impact the atmospheric circulation regime at a given rotation rate. If Rp ex-ceeds LRo , the atmospheric dynamics may favor the formation of a more confined equatorial jet (similar to the narrow bands of Jupiter), rather than a planet-wide jet as illustrated in Figure 3 (panel e). In contrast, if the planet is too small compared to LRo ,it may be unable to contain Rossby waves, thereby preventing 

> Article number, page 6 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

Fig. 3: Latitude-longitude maps of temperature and winds averaged over ∼50 orbits (corresponding to ∼500 Earth days) for Cases 2A, 2B and 2C (specified in Table 3) and at di ff erent pressure levels. The zonal and meridional components of the winds are represented by the arrows. Panels a, b and c show maps at the surface and panels d, e and f show maps at a mean pressure level of 0.5 bar. The solid white line contour corresponds to the 273.15 K isotherm below which water freezes and the dotted white line contour corresponds to the location of surface liquid water. the formation of a super-rotating jet. Using the minimum mass of Ross 128 b derived from the RV measurements and assum-ing an Earth-like rocky composition, we can estimate a lower limit for Rp at ∼1.1 R⊕ via the mass-radius relationship from Parc et al. (2024). This value yields similar conclusions regard-ing the circulation regime as the previous calculations. There-fore, Ross 128 b is more likely to exhibit a super-rotating atmo-spheric circulation regime (with the presence of a planet-wide equatorial jet and Rossby-wave gyres), assuming a synchronous rotation, for N 2 and CO 2 atmospheres. 

> 3.1.2. Atmospheric water vapor, surface liquid water and cloud distribution

In this section, we discuss the distribution of the global water content in Case 2B. Figure 4 shows the column-integrated water vapor concentration, the liquid water content at the surface and the ice surface density. Figure 5 presents the maps of column-integrated water clouds, outgoing longwave radiation (OLR, i.e., thermal emission at the top of the atmosphere) and albedo at the top of the atmosphere (TOA albedo). Here we focus on the maps corresponding to Case 2B shown in panels b and e of Figure 4 (for water vapor and surface liquid water, respectively), and in panels b, e and h of Figure 5 (for clouds, OLR and TOA albedo, respectively). Figure 4 (panel b) shows relatively homogenous water vapor concentrations (with a di ff erence of ∼8 kg m −2 between the min-imum and maximum values) and an average water vapor mixing ratio of 83 kg m −2. The water vapor concentrations are lower above the heated region on the dayside. This is caused by the atmospheric circulation, which transports water vapor vertically (with the ascending branches of the Hadley cells) and induces di-vergence from the heat source at higher altitudes, leading to the decrease of the water vapor concentrations. The regions show-ing the highest water vapor concentrations are located on the nightside near the western terminator at mid-latitudes in both hemispheres, corresponding to the locations of the Rossby-wave gyres (as discussed in Section 3.1.1). These regions have surface temperatures low enough (see Figure 3) to allow condensation of atmospheric water vapor into liquid phase at the surface, as illustrated on the surface liquid water map (panel e). Figure 5 (panel b) shows that in Case 2B, water clouds form preferentially on the nightside and near the western terminator. These cloud patterns are consistent with the descriptions of Ko-dama et al. (2019), Turbet et al. (2021) and Chaverot et al. (2023) for land planets or water-rich atmospheres. For planets with water-rich atmospheres but lacking surface liquid water oceans, the high absorption of incoming stellar radiation (ISR) by atmo-spheric water vapor increases dayside temperatures. This tem-perature increase reduces moist convection above the substellar point, thereby inhibiting cloud formation on the dayside. More-over, the atmospheric circulation enables heat transport from the dayside to the nightside. The cooling of the warm and moist air parcels reaching the nightside leads to cloud formation on the nightside (Turbet et al. 2021; Chaverot et al. 2023). This is con-sistent with Case 2B, characterized by a water-rich atmosphere, high dayside temperatures and the absence of surface liquid wa-ter on the dayside, which reduces moist convection in this region and prevents the formation of dayside clouds. Nightside clouds have a net warming e ff ect because of their effi cient greenhouse e ff ect (Turbet et al. 2021; Chaverot et al. 2023). They absorb the thermal emission from the lower atmo-spheric layers and the planetary surface, which reduces the OLR above the clouds. Figure 5 (panel e) shows this decrease in OLR on the nightside, with a pattern corresponding to the shape of the cloud distribution. Furthermore, the TOA albedo map (panel h) shows a slight increase in albedo near the western terminator, which could be attributed to the clouds located on the western terminator (with a small fraction on the dayside, see panel b). This point will be further discussed in Section 4. 

> 3.1.3. Evolution of the global water content

Figure 6 shows that the global contents of atmospheric water va-por and surface liquid water exhibit a variability over time, char-acterized by fluctuations between higher and lower liquid water  

> Article number, page 7 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

Fig. 4: Latitude-longitude maps of column-integrated water vapor (panels a, b and c), water ice surface density (panel d) and surface liquid water (panels e and f) for Cases 2A, 2B and 2C. The variables are averaged over ∼50 orbits. Each map uses a di ff erent color map scaling. 

Fig. 5: Latitude-longitude maps of column-integrated water clouds (panels a, b and c), outgoing longwave radiation (OLR, panels d, e and f) and albedo at the top of the atmosphere (TOA albedo, panels g, h and i) for Cases 2A, 2B and 2C. The variables are averaged over ∼50 orbits. The dashed white line on the albedo color bar corresponds to the surface albedo. content levels at the surface, approaching near-zero values 1. We   

> 1The di ff erence of total water mass ( ∆qmass ,total ) is expected to be at zero. However, this is not what is shown in Figure 6, indicating that the global water content of the system is not conserved. This requires fur-ther investigation. However, the di ff erence corresponds only to 10 −3%, thus this should not have an impact on the simulation.

observe an anti-correlation between water vapor and the com-bination of clouds and surface liquid water, with the lowest sur-face liquid water levels corresponding to the highest atmospheric water vapor concentrations. This behavior is potentially indica-tive of a transient and unstable climate regime. We tested the robustness of this state by performing a simulation with a sim-

> Article number, page 8 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

ilar yet slightly di ff erent global water content corresponding to 8 cm GEL, initially condensed at the surface. Despite these dif-ferent initial conditions, we find a similar outcome where water alternates between condensation in the cold points at the surface and evaporation back in the atmosphere (see Figure B.1 in Ap-pendix B). As we expect this state to exist only within a narrow range of water content, we explore in the next section the impact of varying the global water content on the climate. 

Fig. 6: Temporal evolutions of the column-integrated water va-por (top panel), water clouds, surface liquid water and ice sur-face density (middle panel) for Case 2B. The mean values are represented by the solid lines, while the minimum and maxi-mum values are defined by the filled areas in the first two panels. The lower panel represents the deviations of the total water mass content for each quantity from its respective initial value. 

> 3.2. Variation of the water inventory

In this section, we vary the global water content of the system to estimate its impact on the climate of Ross 128 b. The subsequent simulations correspond to Cases 2A, 2B and 2C, where the mean atmospheric surface pressure and gas composition are fixed at 1 bar of N 2 atmosphere, as specified in Table 3. We vary the initial global water content (considered here as the only free pa-rameter) from 6 cm GEL (Case 2A) to 83.3 cm GEL (Case 2C) 2.The results are shown in Figures 3, 5 and 4.  

> 2We also performed a simulation for a dry case, which is an idealized scenario useful to show the potential climate regimes and atmospheric circulation patterns on tidally locked rocky planets. This dry case ex-hibits the lowest mean surface temperature ( ∼250 K) and the highest day /night temperature contrast ( ∼255 K). Since Case 2A (6 cm GEL) shows comparable results, the climate regimes of these two scenarios will be considered equivalent in this study.
> 3.2.1. Impact on the circulation regime

The atmospheric circulation patterns illustrated in Figure 3 show similar characteristics across all cases. All surface maps show a convergence of surface winds towards the hottest point (panels a, b and c). At higher altitudes, each case exhibits the presence of an eastward equatorial jet and Rossby-wave gyres (panels d, e and f). This suggests that variations of the initial water reservoir for the specific case of Ross 128 b with an N 2 atmosphere may not a ff ect the circulation regime described in Section 3.1.1. 

> 3.2.2. Impact on the climate regime

Figure 3 shows that, in all cases, surface temperatures tend to increase with increasing water content, with mean values of ap-proximately 268 K, 337 K and 456 K for Case 2A (panel a), Case 2B (panel b) and Case 2C (panel c), respectively. This cor-responds to an increase of nearly 200 K from the driest to the most water-rich scenario. Moreover, the day /night temperature contrast decreases as water content increases. Specifically, the temperature di ff erence between the hottest point on the dayside and the coldest regions on the nightside decreases from around 234 K for Case 2A to 152 K for Case 2B, and 144 K for Case 2C. This indicates a reduction of nearly 100 K in the thermal contrast between the two extreme scenarios. Case 2A exhibits nightside temperatures below the freezing point of water at 1 bar of pressure. This enables water conden-sation into ice on the two coldest points of the nightside surface, as illustrated on the ice surface density map in Figure 4 (panel d). This collapse of water into the surface cold traps leads to the depletion of the atmospheric water vapor, as seen in Fig-ure 4 (panel a), which shows a mean water vapor mixing ratio of 0.2 kg m −2. The climate regime of the driest scenario rep-resents a stable equilibrium characterized by dominant surface ice accumulation on the nightside. This state is triggered when the nightside surface temperatures drop below the water freezing point, causing the atmospheric water vapor to condense into ice at the surface. In this regime, the greenhouse warming e ff ect of atmospheric water vapor is e ff ectively overcome by the surface condensation process. This climate state is referred to as the col-lapsed state in Leconte et al. (2013b), indicating that water exists predominantly in solid form at the surface, with atmospheric wa-ter vapor largely depleted and replaced by surface ice deposits. On the other hand, in the case of the most water-rich sce-nario represented by Case 2C, the climate reaches another stable equilibrium where surface temperatures are su ffi ciently high to maintain water completely vaporized in the atmosphere. This re-sults in a more e ffi cient greenhouse e ff ect leading to an increase of the global surface temperatures. This trend occurs because water vapor facilitates more e ffi cient heat redistribution through the atmosphere. This leads to a reduction of the day /night tem-perature contrast and an o ff set of the hottest point at the surface from the substellar point. This state is referred to as the runaway state in Leconte et al. (2013b). Other cases with higher water vapor contents would lead to higher surface temperatures. These results are characteristic of the moist bistability de-scribed in Leconte et al. (2013b). They show the existence of two stable climate regimes for rocky planets orbiting closer to their stars than the inner edge of the HZ. In this study, we will con-sider three representative climate states: (1) the collapsed state, illustrated in Case 2A, where all available water is trapped as nightside surface ice deposits, (2) the transient state, described in Case 2B in Section 3.1, where water is mostly vaporized in the atmosphere but surface liquid water is sustained in the two  

> Article number, page 9 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

nightside cold regions and (3) the runaway state, represented by Case 2C, where all available water is vaporized in the atmo-sphere. 

> 3.2.3. Impact on the water vapor distribution

Figures 4 (panels a, b and c) shows that Cases 2A, 2B and 2C correspond to distinct regimes of water vapor concentra-tion, characterized by di ff erent mean mixing ratios: 0.2 kg m −2

in Case 2A (indicative of a water vapor-depleted atmosphere), 83 kg m −2 in Case 2B and 833 kg m −2 in Case 2C (both repre-sentative of states in which water is globally vaporized in the atmosphere). As the global water content increases, the water vapor concentrations increase and the atmospheric heat trans-port becomes more e ffi cient. This induces the eastward shifts of (1) the hottest point from the substellar point at the surface and (2) the Rossby-wave gyres (and the corresponding cold points at the surface) toward the western terminator (Figure 3). Although the column-integrated water vapor concentrations are spatially homogeneous in all cases, with relative di ff erences between minimum and maximum values of 46%, 9% and 5% for Cases 2A, 2B and 2C, respectively, the water vapor spatial distribution seems to vary with the global water content, and thus the prevailing climate regime. First, all cases show lower water vapor concentrations above the dayside, due to the as-cending branches of the Hadley cells transporting water vapor away from the heated regions (as discussed in Section 3.1.2). Second, both stable equilibrium states (Cases 2A and 2C) show lower water vapor concentrations at the Rossby-wave gyre re-gions. These regions experience subsiding air motion (from the descending branches of the circulation cells) and divergence near the surface, which e ff ectively transport water vapor away from the gyre regions, inducing this decrease of water vapor concen-trations. In contrast, the transient state (Case 2B) di ff ers by pre-senting higher concentrations in these regions, which coincide with the locations of the colder surface regions where liquid wa-ter is maintained. Liquid water can evaporate from the surface back to the atmosphere, and this local evaporation (which tends to increase water vapor concentrations in these regions) may pre-dominate over the large-scale water vapor transport (which tends to reduce water vapor concentrations in these regions). This may result in higher water vapor concentrations in the Rossby-wave gyre regions, as observed in Case 2B. 

> 3.2.4. Impact on the cloud distribution

Figure 5 (panels a, b and c) illustrates the vertically integrated water cloud formation patterns across the three cases. The driest scenario (Case 2A) remains essentially cloud-free, showing the correlation between the cloud content and the water reservoir. In Case 2C, clouds mainly form in the nightside, with a higher cloud density in the western hemisphere, similar to the cloud distribution observed in Case 2B (described in Section 3.1.2). The overall cloud content in Case 2C exceeds that of Case 2B, corresponding to its higher water vapor concentration. 

> 3.3. Effect of the atmospheric composition on the climate

In this section, we discuss the impact of varying atmospheric compositions on the climate. The simulation setups presented here are Cases 2, 4 and 6 (defined in Table 3). They correspond to atmospheres of N 2 (Case 2), N 2 + 376 ppm CO 2 (Case 4) and CO 2 (Case 6). All three cases assume synchronous rotation and 1 bar of surface pressure. They were simulated under dry and wet conditions, and the wet scenarios include a global water content of 8.3 cm GEL (thus Case 2 with wet conditions corresponds to Case 2B). We provide a summarized description of our results here. The maps of surface temperatures, water vapor, clouds and TOA albedo corresponding to these results are available in Ap-pendix C.1. CO 2 has a warming e ff ect on climate: in dry and wet sce-narios, temperatures tend to increase across the surface with in-creasing partial pressures of CO 2 in the atmosphere. CO 2 is a more e ff ective ISR (i.e., incoming stellar radiation) absorber for a planet around an M dwarf star than around a Sun-like star, due to its strong absorption lines in the near-infrared. Despite this warming e ff ect, the surface temperatures in the three setups un-der dry conditions remain below the freezing point of water in the coldest nightside regions. Further simulations would be use-ful to investigate the minimum CO 2 content needed to prevent the formation of these cold traps where ice could accumulate, as explored in Turbet et al. (2016) and Taniguchi et al. (2026). In the wet scenarios, the three atmospheric setups show sim-ilar climate features: (1) they maintain temperatures above the freezing point of water across the surface, (2) they exhibit con-centrations of atmospheric water vapor similar to Case 2B (due to similar water inventory), with most of the available water re-maining gaseous within the atmosphere, and (3) they show sim-ilar cloud distributions, with clouds forming preferentially on the nightside. In particular, both cases with N 2-dominated at-mospheres (Cases 2 and 4) in wet conditions show compara-ble surface temperatures, with temperature conditions allowing condensation of water into liquid form within the two surface cold traps. In contrast, the CO 2-dominated atmosphere scenario (Case 6) shows higher surface temperatures, preventing the con-densation of liquid water on the surface. Therefore, Case 4 (in wet conditions) is analogous to Case 2B (i.e., our transient state in which most of the water is vaporized in the atmosphere, but some surface liquid water is sustained within the nightside cold traps), and Case 6 (in wet conditions) aligns with Case 2C (run-away state in which all available water remains in vapor form in the atmosphere). 

> 3.4. Effect of the atmospheric surface pressure on the climate

This section investigates the e ff ects of varying mean surface pressures on the climate for N 2 and CO 2 atmospheres. We fo-cus on Cases 1, 2 and 3, corresponding to N 2 atmospheres with surface pressures of 0.1, 1 and 10 bars, respectively, and Cases 5 and 6, corresponding to CO 2 atmospheres with surface pressures of 0.1 and 1 bar, respectively (as detailed in Table 3). All cases assume synchronous rotation. As in the previous section, we pro-vide a summarized description of our results here. A more de-tailed description of the results is available in Appendix C.2, with maps of surface temperatures, water vapor, clouds, TOA albedo, H 2O and CO 2 ice surface densities. 

> 3.4.1. N 2-dominated atmospheres

For N 2 atmospheres, we conducted simulations under dry and wet conditions. The scenarios in wet conditions include a water inventory of 8.3 cm GEL. In both dry and wet regimes, increas-ing surface pressures tend to increase temperatures across the surface and reduce the day /night temperature contrast, showing stronger heat redistribution. Among the wet scenarios, the case 

> Article number, page 10 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

with a thin atmosphere (0.1 bar) shows the highest temperature contrast, with surface temperatures on the nightside dropping below the freezing point of water. This results in the conden-sation of water into ice on the surface nightside, with a higher ice surface density in the cold traps near the western terminator. Therefore, Case 1 in wet conditions exhibits a climate regime analogous to Case 2A, with a water-depleted atmosphere and the presence of surface ice on the nightside. In contrast, the tem-peratures for the case with a dense atmosphere (10 bars) under wet conditions are high enough to maintain water fully vapor-ized in the atmosphere. Thus, the climate regime of Case 3 in wet conditions is similar to Case 2C. 

> 3.4.2. CO 2-dominated atmospheres

We conducted the simulations for Cases 5 and 6 (CO 2 atmo-spheres) with a water inventory equivalent to 0.83 cm GEL. In the case of a thin atmosphere (0.1 bar) and low water content (0.83 cm GEL), the surface temperatures on the nightside fall below the water freezing point and the CO 2 condensation tem-perature at 0.1 bar. This enables water vapor and CO 2 in the at-mosphere to condense into ice in the cold traps at the surface. As CO 2 is the main constituent of the atmosphere in this case, this leads to the collapse of the atmosphere. The temporal evolution of the mean surface pressure for Case 5 illustrated in Figure 7 shows that the initial mean surface pressure of 0.1 bar decreases over time to around 0.01 bar, indi-cating the atmospheric collapse. The collapse of CO 2 reduces the e ffi ciency of the heat redistribution, resulting in a higher day /night thermal contrast that facilitates the condensation of atmospheric CO 2 within the colder regions. This positive feed-back is described in Turbet et al. (2016). This case highlights the importance of e ffi cient heat redistribution in CO 2-dominated atmospheres, driven by su ffi cient CO 2 abundance, to prevent at-mospheric collapse and maintain the stability of the atmosphere (Turbet et al. 2016; Maurel et al. 2025). 

Fig. 7: Temporal evolution of the mean atmospheric surface pressure for the collapsing case of a CO 2-dominated atmosphere initialized with a surface pressure of 0.1 bar (Case 5) and a global water content corresponding to 0.83 cm GEL. 

> 3.5. Comparison synchronous/asynchronous rotations

In this section, we analyze the impact of a scenario with an asyn-chronous rotation (5:2 spin-orbit resonance) and high obliquity (79°) on the climate of Ross 128 b. Here we compare two se-tups assuming (1) 1:1 resonance with 0° obliquity and (2) 5:2 resonance with 79° obliquity. We assume 1 bar of N 2 and CO 2

atmospheres (Cases 2 and 6, respectively) and 8.3 cm GEL of water inventory. As in the previous sections, we provide a sum-marized description of our results here (the corresponding maps of surface temperatures, water vapor, clouds and TOA albedo are available in Appendix C.3). In both N 2 and CO 2 atmospheres, the surface temperatures, water vapor and clouds are more uniformly distributed across the planet (especially along the equator) in the case of a 5:2 resonance. The higher spin-orbit resonance (corresponding to a higher rotation rate of 1 .8 × 10 −5) induces a more e ff ective longitudinal transport of heat and water vapor across the atmo-sphere, and a significant reduction of the temperature contrasts. The high obliquity induces slightly higher temperatures at the poles, but the temperature contrasts between the warmer poles and the colder equator remain significantly lower compared to the day /night temperature contrasts in the synchronous config-urations. This homogenization of the temperature distribution (1) enables cloud formation uniformly around the planet and (2) prevents the condensation of water into liquid phase on the surface, a condition that occurs under synchronous rotation and for an N 2 atmosphere (see Case 2B described in Section 3.1). Therefore, in the cases assuming 5:2 resonance, all available wa-ter is vaporized in the atmosphere, which is consistent with the climate regime represented by Case 2C. 

> 3.6. Overview of the results and link with the planetary albedo

The results are summarized in Figure 8, which shows the mean surface temperatures across all simulated cases, including their respective minimum and maximum values. The distribution of mean surface temperatures shows significant variability, ranging from approximately 230 K in scenarios characterized by tenu-ous N 2-dominated atmospheres with limited water reservoirs, to 671 K in cases involving dense CO 2-rich atmospheres with high water contents. This temperature range reflects diverse climate regimes, highlighting the high sensitivity of the planetary cli-mate to a broad range of parameters, including total water inven-tory, surface pressure, atmospheric composition and the plane-tary rotation state. The atmospheric water vapor concentration is determined by the total water reservoir of the planet. In runaway scenarios, characterized by high global temperatures, e ffi cient heat redis-tribution and minimal day /night temperature contrasts, a linear correlation exists between the water vapor content and the sur-face temperature. We find that planets are in a runaway scenario even with a relatively small water content (transition around 8 cm GEL). Moreover, scenarios with dense atmospheres or at-mospheres enriched with other greenhouse gases such as CO 2

tend to the runaway state. In contrast, colder climate regimes, marked by high day /night thermal contrasts due to less e ff ective heat redistribution, manifest in scenarios with very low global water contents ( < 8 cm GEL), thin atmospheres, or atmospheres poor in other greenhouse gases. Under such conditions, a sub-stantial fraction of the atmospheric water vapor can condense into ice on the surface (see Figure 4). However, the condensa-tion occurs exclusively on the nightside, where surface tempera-tures allow phase transition, whereas the dayside remains free of condensation due to higher temperatures. This pattern is primar-ily governed by the atmospheric circulation regimes character-istic of synchronously rotating planets. Furthermore, while con-densed ice scenarios tend to produce low cloud contents, water clouds preferentially form on the nightside in the warmer scenar- 

> Article number, page 11 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

Fig. 8: Mean surface temperatures for all simulated cases; markers indicate the global mean, while error bars extend from the minimum to the maximum surface temperatures. Gray markers represent the dry cases; dark blue markers represent the collapsed states (where water collapses into ice, Case 2A); light blue markers represent the transient states with trapped surface liquid water (Case 2B); and red markers represent the runaway states (where all water is vaporized, Case 2C). The dashed bar represents the case where atmospheric CO 2 collapses into surface ice (atmospheric collapse). The left panel presents cases with synchronous rotations, and the right panel cases with asynchronous rotations, using spin-orbit resonance, eccentricity and obliquity values from Valente & Correia (2022). The 273.15 K isotherm below which water freezes and the isotherms below which CO 2 condenses at 0.1, 1 and 10 bars are represented by the gray and red dashed lines, respectively. ios, in agreement with Kodama et al. (2019), Turbet et al. (2021) and Chaverot et al. (2023). In the context of assessing the planetary albedo, the main quantities potentially a ff ecting the dayside reflectivity include the atmospheric water vapor concentration, the surface water condensation (into ice or liquid) and the cloud distribution, all of which modulated by the prevailing climate regime. In scenar-ios exhibiting runaway conditions or presence of surface liquid water, we expect high water vapor concentrations to decrease the planetary reflectivity due to the high water vapor absorption e ffi -ciency, particularly within the near-infrared. Moreover, the cloud formation, mainly occurring in the nightside, is not expected to significantly impact the planetary albedo. In collapsed scenarios, the surface water condensation mainly occurring in the nightside and the limited cloud coverage are not expected to have a sub-stantial influence on the reflectivity. The subsequent section aims to quantitatively check these hypotheses. 

4. Detectability of Ross 128 b in reflected light 

This section presents the detectability analysis of Ross 128 b in reflected light, using it as a representative analog for the popula-tion of warm, short-orbit exoplanets that are overrepresented due to observational biases. With a maximum angular separation of 14.7 mas, Ross 128 b currently lies outside the detection limits of RISTRETTO and ANDES (see Figure 1); however, it remains a potential target for observation with PCS, which aims to also cover the visible and could reach the contrast and separation re-quired for direct characterization. Given that Ross 128 b has the smallest angular separation and highest stellar irradiation among the targets of the ANDES golden sample, it can serve as a repre-sentative example for highly irradiated planets, which are more likely to exhibit a runaway climate if they host water. This work can then help to prepare the upcoming observations in reflected light with the ELT by providing a more accurate assessment of the spectral reflectivity of these targets. In this section, we dis-cuss the Bond (4.1) and geometric (4.2) albedos computed for all simulated cases explored in the previous section. The results are shown in Figures 9 and 10 and summarized in Table D.1. 

> 4.1. Bond albedo

In this section, we calculate the Bond albedo (i.e., the reflectiv-ity at the top of the atmosphere integrated over all wavelengths) of Ross 128 b assuming the di ff erent climates obtained in the GCM simulations described in Section 3. The values are shown in Figure 10, and compared to the albedo of the rocky surface represented by the dashed gray line ( Asurf = 0.2). 

> 4.1.1. Effect of atmospheric absorbers

The Bond albedo for the dry, N 2 atmosphere scenario at 1 bar of surface pressure is 0.21 (Case 2, as specified in Table 3). 

> Article number, page 12 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

This value closely approximates the surface albedo, indicating a radiatively transparent atmosphere. In Case 2A (water vapor-depleted scenario), the Bond albedo is slightly decreased to 0.19. For fully vaporized atmospheres (Cases 2B and 2C) with mean water vapor mixing ratios of 83 and 833 kg m −2, respectively, the Bond albedo further decreases to 0.11 and 0.05. This trend indicates that, for planets orbiting M dwarf stars whose spec-tral emission peaks in the near-infrared, atmospheric water vapor reduces the Bond albedo by increasing absorption in the water spectral bands that coincide with significative stellar flux. For runaway climate states, increased water vapor concentrations would then enhance the planetary mean absorptivity, potentially limiting the detection of the total reflected flux of the planet. Moreover, water clouds are mainly located on the nightside (Ko-dama et al. 2019; Turbet et al. 2021; Chaverot et al. 2023) and thus do not contribute to the reflectivity of the planet. The dry scenario at 1 bar of surface pressure simulated with an Earth-like composition (Case 4) exhibits a Bond albedo of 0.2, similar to the pure N 2 atmosphere case. In contrast, a pure CO 2 atmosphere as in Case 6 results in a lower Bond albedo of 0.15. This indicates that the Bond albedo reduces with increasing partial pressure of CO 2.Across all scenarios explored, Figure 10 shows that the Bond albedo ranges between 0.05 and 0.24, rarely exceeding the sur-face albedo value of 0.2. The mean planetary absorptivity tends to be higher, showing a significative sensitivity to the presence of e ffi cient near-infrared absorbers in the atmosphere (water va-por and CO 2 here). Therefore, photometric measurements could provide initial constraints on the presence of strong atmospheric absorbers, but high-resolution spectroscopy is needed to identify them. 

> 4.1.2. Effect of the atmospheric surface pressure

In the dry, N 2 atmosphere scenario with a surface pressure of 10 bars (Case 3), corresponding to a higher atmospheric density, the Bond albedo reaches a maximum value of 0.24, higher than the 0.21 value obtained at 1 bar. This enhancement is driven by the Rayleigh scattering of N 2, which is more e ffi cient in denser atmospheres, thereby increasing the planetary albedo in the visi-ble. Therefore, increased surface pressures can amplify the plan-etary reflectivity through Rayleigh scattering. However, multiple parameters, such as dayside cloud coverage, atmospheric hazes or surface ice, can lead to similar increases in the total reflected flux of the planet. These degeneracies limit the ability to dis-entangle individual contributions through photometric observa-tions only. 

> 4.2. Spectral geometric albedo

Figure 9 presents the geometric albedo spectra computed with Pytmosph3R for all scenarios. The mean geometric albedo val-ues, derived over the spectral ranges covered by RISTRETTO and ANDES, are shown in Figure 10. 

> 4.2.1. Variation of total water inventory

The top panel of Figure 9 shows the geometric albedo spec-tra corresponding to Cases 2A, 2B and 2C (representative of the three climate regimes described in Section 3). All scenar-ios exhibit spectral features associated with water vapor absorp-tion bands in the near-infrared. The collapsed case, character-ized by atmospheric water depletion (with a mean water vapor mixing ratio of 0.2 kg m −2), shows relatively weak and narrow absorption features. In contrast, the transient and runaway sce-narios, which involve higher atmospheric water vapor concentra-tions, are characterized by broader and deeper absorption bands, rapidly reaching zero flux levels within these spectral regions. This indicates a high optical thickness and e ffi cient absorption of the stellar incident flux due to the presence of abundant at-mospheric water vapor. This leads to the decrease of the overall reflected flux, which is consistent with the initial Bond albedo analyses. The spectral disparities between the collapsed and runaway scenarios shown in Figure 9, as described also in Leconte et al. (2013b), suggest that high-resolution spectroscopy, given su ffi -cient total flux, could allow di ff erentiating these two di ff erent climate regimes. Further analyses are required to provide more quantitative assessments to determine how water vapor absorp-tion decreases the reflected flux and impacts the detection sensi-tivity, by exploring more water vapor abundances scenarios be-tween the two boundary values described in this study. For RISTRETTO and ANDES, we can assess preliminary constraints on the detectability of a planet with 1 bar of N 2 atmo-sphere and various water reservoirs. We can already infer from the analysis of the three spectra presented in Figure 9 that the ge-ometric albedo within the RISTRETTO bandpass is higher rel-ative to that within the ANDES YJH bands. The mean geomet-ric albedo values illustrated in Figure 10 confirms this assess-ment. The collapsed case (dark blue) exhibits the highest mean geometric albedo among the three cases for both RISTRETTO and ANDES, with values ranging from 0.11 to 0.13. These val-ues closely correspond to the geometric albedo of a Lamber-tian sphere with a surface albedo of 0.2, which means that the atmosphere is relatively radiatively transparent. In both instru-ments, the geometric albedo shows a decreasing trend with in-creasing atmospheric water vapor concentration, reaching val-ues from 0.01 to 0.07, which aligns with the initial Bond albedo estimate. This behavior is due to the sensitivity of both instru-ment bandpasses to water vapor absorption features, as shown in Figure 9. Therefore, the e ffi cient absorption of the stellar in-cident radiation in these spectral regions limits the detection of the planetary reflected light. The detection sensitivity is particu-larly impacted within the Y, J and H bands covered by ANDES, which coincide with the main water vapor absorption features in the near-infrared (at 0.9, 1.1 and 1.4 μm). This results in a more pronounced disparity in geometric albedo between the two instruments as atmospheric water vapor abundance increases. 

> 4.2.2. Variation of surface pressure

The top right panel of Figure 9 shows the computed geometric albedo spectra for Cases 1, 2 and 3 (synchronous rotation, N 2 at-mosphere) with di ff erent surface pressures (0.1 to 10 bars). They include scenarios simulated under dry conditions 3 (dashed lines) and with a water inventory of 8.3 cm GEL (solid lines). The case at 0.1 bar represents a collapsed climate state where all available water is condensed into surface ice. This is evi-denced by the spectrum, which exhibits a broad shape without spectral features, with a geometric albedo converging to 2 /3 of 

Asurf at all wavelengths. This case approximates a bare rock sce-nario without atmosphere, which would also be plausible given   

> 3In the dry scenarios, the correlated-k tables used for the radiative transfer computations incorporate a residual water content. Therefore, minor spectral features associated with water vapor absorption remain observable in the spectra. Article number, page 13 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

Fig. 9: Geometric albedo spectra computed between 0.4 and 1.8 μm. The spectral coverage regions of RISTRETTO and ANDES are depicted by the shaded blue areas. All cases assume a synchronous rotation. Top left: Spectra corresponding to Cases 2A, 2B and 2C, representative of the three climate states described in Section 3 (collapsed, transient and runaway states, corresponding to mean water vapor mixing ratios of 0.2, 83 and 833 kg m −2, respectively). Each case assumes 1 bar of N 2 atmosphere. Top right: 

Spectra for Cases 1, 2B and 3, assuming an N 2 atmosphere and varying surface pressures from 0.1 to 10 bars. The dashed spectra represent the dry scenarios, while the solid lines represent cases with a water inventory fixed to 8.3 cm GEL. Bottom left: Spectra for Cases 2, 4 and 6, corresponding to distinct atmospheric compositions and a given surface pressure of 1 bar. The dashed spectra represent the dry scenarios, while the solid lines represent cases with a water inventory fixed to 8.3 cm GEL. Bottom right: Spectra corresponding to cases with di ff erent surface pressures (0.1, 1 and 10 bars), for N 2 (dashed lines, Cases 1, 2 and 3) and CO 2 (solid lines, Cases 5, 6 and 7) atmospheres. The global water content corresponds to 0.83 cm GEL for 0.1 bar; 8.3 cm GEL for 1 bar; and 83.3 cm GEL for 10 bars. the proximity of the planet to its host star (Kreidberg & Steven-son 2025). Under such conditions, the spectrum would be flatter and with fewer features. The 1 bar and 10 bars cases present two main spectral fea-tures that can provide hints on the atmospheric water vapor con-tent and the atmospheric density: (1) in the near-infrared, both cases show pronounced and saturated water absorption bands, indicating the presence of water vapor with comparable mix-ing ratios ( ∼83 kg m −2), as described in the previous part and (2) both cases exhibit a significant increase of the flux in the vis-ible, with the geometric albedo reaching 0.2 for the 1 bar case and 0.45 for the 10 bars case (for both dry and water-rich spec-tra). This increase in reflected flux is due to Rayleigh scattering and indicates a concentration of atmospheric molecules consis-tent with higher atmospheric surface pressure and density. Increased backscattering by the atmosphere boosts the re-flected flux, thereby potentially improving the detectability. These trends are also observed in Figure 10, which shows that the geometric albedo of an N 2 atmosphere within the RISTRETTO bandpass exhibits an increase from 1 to 10 bars for both dry and water-rich scenarios (reaching 0.2 for the dry case). In contrast, the di ff erences between 1 and 10 bars are negligible for the ANDES spectral bands, where the spectrum is dominated by water absorption. This discrepancy occurs be-cause the RISTRETTO spectral range presents a higher sensitiv-ity to the albedo boost driven by the Rayleigh scattering, as this spectral region coincides with the characteristic Rayleigh scat-

> Article number, page 14 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

Fig. 10: Mean Bond and geometric albedos for all simulated cases (the values can be found in Table D.1). The Bond albedo values are represented by transparent circles. The mean geometric albedo values are computed for the RISTRETTO bandpass (hexagons), and the Y, J and H bands (triangles) as described in Table 4. The dashed gray horizontal line indicates the rocky surface albedo Asurf 

considered in all GCM simulations. The dotted gray line delineates the geometric albedo of a Lambertian spherical surface with a surface albedo Asurf of 0.2, which is equal to 2 /3 of Asurf (the 2 /3 factor comes from the projection of a flat Lambertian disk on a spherical surface). tering peak, seen between 0.4 and ∼0.9 μm in the spectra (Fig-ure 9). Moreover, a quantitative assessment of the contribution of Rayleigh scattering to the observed reflected flux is constrained by parameter degeneracies, including the surface albedo, as well as dayside cloud and haze coverage (if the climate allows it). However, in these scenarios, our climate simulations indicate that the cloud formation mainly occurs in the nightside, result-ing in a negligible impact on the planetary spectral reflectivity. Consequently, clouds can be excluded from the degeneracy pa-rameters. 

> 4.2.3. Variation of atmospheric composition

The bottom left panel of Figure 9 shows the synthetic spectra for Cases 2, 4 and 6 (synchronous rotation, 1 bar of surface pressure) with varying atmospheric gas compositions (N 2, Earth-like and CO 2). They include dry scenarios (dashed lines) and scenarios with water inventory of 8.3 cm GEL (solid lines). The spectra of simulations assuming 376 ppm of CO 2 (dry and water vapor-rich) show additional absorption features corre-sponding to the CO 2 absorption bands at 1.1, 1.2, 1.4 and 1.6 μm. These spectral signatures are more prominent in CO 2-dominated atmospheres, which nearly absorb all incident flux within the ANDES YJH spectral bands. Consequently, for equivalent water vapor content, the mean geometric albedo within the YJH bands decreases significantly for CO 2-rich atmospheres, reaching val-ues as low as 0.05 in dry conditions and 0.01 in the water-rich scenario for the H band (see Figure 10). The high absorption e ffi -ciency of CO 2-rich atmospheres poses challenges for detection. In contrast, for a fixed water vapor amount, the mean ge-ometric albedo values are similar in the spectral range of RISTRETTO across all three atmospheric compositions (0.13 and 0.11 for dry and water-rich scenarios respectively, see Fig-ure 10). Thus, the RISTRETTO bandpass is not sensitive to de-creases in albedo caused by CO 2 absorption, unlike the sensitiv-ity to water vapor variations. Moreover, the spectra corresponding to CO 2-dominated at-mospheres (both dry and water-rich) show a slight increase in the geometric albedo, reaching up to 0.25 at 0.4 μm (slightly higher than N 2-dominated atmospheres, reaching 0.2 at the same wave-length, see Figure 9). This di ff erence indicates a higher Rayleigh scattering e ffi ciency in CO 2-rich atmospheres for a given surface pressure. However, this does not a ff ect the geometric albedo in the RISTRETTO bandpass, which remains similar for the three atmospheric compositions. This spectral feature becomes more significative in atmospheres with higher surface pressures (e.g., 10 bars). As shown in the bottom right panel of Figure 9, which compares spectra of N 2 and CO 2 atmospheres at various surface pressures, the geometric albedo in a 10 bar-CO 2 environment in-creases to 0.49 at 0.4 μm, surpassing the 0.45 albedo observed in the N 2 atmosphere at the same wavelength. Moreover, Figure 10 indicates a slight increase in the average geometric albedo for RISTRETTO from 0.11 to 0.12 for a 10 bar-CO 2-dominated, water-rich atmosphere (compared to N 2), due to the more e ffi -cient Rayleigh scattering by CO 2 in denser atmospheres. Thus, the sensitivity of RISTRETTO to CO 2 Rayleigh scattering re-quires high-pressure conditions to detect a discernable flux in-crease. However, even at high surface pressures, water absorp- 

> Article number, page 15 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

tion reduces the detectability of atmospheric signatures by de-creasing the mean geometric albedo in the RISTRETTO band-pass. 

> 4.3. Overview of the results

Figure 10 shows the mean Bond and geometric albedo values for all the cases we investigated, highlighting the influence of total water inventory, surface pressure, atmospheric composition and planetary rotation on the planetary spectral reflectivity. All values are given in Table D.1. Figure 10 reveals clear correla-tions between the planetary climate regime and the Bond albedo. Specifically, the transition between di ff erent climate states (cold and runaway) shows two distinct trends associated with each regime: cold states maintain a nearly constant Bond albedo (as seen for N 2 atmospheres), indicating that variations in water con-tent, surface pressure or atmospheric composition do not signif-icantly impact the albedo. Conversely, runaway states show a linear relationship between the Bond albedo and the water reser-voir, with higher water vapor contents leading to lower albedo values. Our results highlight the strong dependency of the albedo to the complexity of climate systems and several key parameters. More specifically, we find that the mean geometric albedo re-mains consistently low across all scenarios investigated in this study. Figure 10 shows that it ranges from 0.07 to 0.2 within the RISTRETTO bandpass and from 0 to 0.14 within the AN-DES YJH bands. Consequently, assuming a constant albedo for di ff erent atmospheric properties can lead to significant inaccura-cies in the assessment of the observability of potential targets. Moreover, based on our geometric albedo estimates (see Fig-ure 10 and Table D.1), adopting an Earth-like albedo of 0.3 in both visible and infrared likely overestimates the actual reflec-tivity of hot rocky exoplanets orbiting closer than the inner edge of the HZ of M dwarf stars. This overestimation may lead to unrealistic detectability predictions. Therefore, for this specific planet population, our results suggest that conservative geomet-ric albedo estimates, such as the ones we produced, should be considered when evaluating the detection limits of these targets and considering such scenarios. In our simulations, clouds do not have a significant e ff ect on the planetary reflectivity. They are mostly on the nightside (as in Turbet et al. 2021; Chaverot et al. 2023), in contrast to previous studies showing the reflective e ff ect of dayside cloud formation patterns for slightly less irradiated planets (e.g., Yang et al. 2013). To conclude, in the RISTRETTO bandpass, the albedo is mainly determined by Rayleigh scattering with thicker atmo-spheres reflecting more light even for higher water contents (see Figure 10, 1 bar CO 2 and 10 bars CO 2). In the ANDES band-passes, the water content is the main parameter a ff ecting the planetary albedo, due to the absorptivity of atmospheric wa-ter vapor (see Figure 10, 1 bar N 2 and 1 bar CO 2). Therefore, these results highlight the need of a synergy between visible (e.g., RISTRETTO) and near-infrared wavelengths (e.g., AN-DES) or an instrument which will combine both (e.g., PCS), as each wavelength ranges present sensitivities to di ff erent physical processes, which can improve the interpretation of the upcoming observations. 

5. Discussion 

This study of the potential climate regimes and reflected-light observability of Ross 128 b relies on several assumptions and in-volves uncertainties that cannot be definitively excluded. These factors may significantly influence (to varying degrees) the plan-etary climate and reflectivity. Such factors include the obliquity, eccentricity, spin-orbit resonance and rotation rate; the orbital in-clination and planetary mass; the planetary composition, radius and gravity; the surface composition and topography; the atmo-spheric escape rate (e.g., Yamashiki et al. 2019); the molecular composition, scale height and scattering properties of a potential atmosphere; the distribution, composition and scattering proper-ties of potential clouds or hazes. The presence of atmospheric hazes, which are not included in our current simulations, could increase the planetary albedo and amplify the reflected flux signal, thereby potentially improv-ing the detectability of close-in, rocky planets. Previous studies have incorporated hazes into their climate simulations to model exoplanets such as Trappist-1 b (Maurel et al. 2025) or Trappist-1 e (including photochemistry, e.g., Wolf et al. 2025). Other works have included photochemistry to simulate other photo-chemical processes on environments like early Mars (Kuzucan et al. in prep.) or Trappist-1 c (Jaziri et al. 2026). Because photochemical hazes can be critical to assess the planetary cli-mate, laboratory experiments aiming at determining the refrac-tive indices of photochemical hazes can be applied on exoplanets (Drant et al. 2025). Including these factors into our simulations represents a potential area for future improvements, and should be considered as a next step in this study. Previous studies have conducted exoplanet climate model-ing by implementing in their models Venus-like atmosphere con-ditions (Quirino et al. 2023), characterized by thick, highly re-flective acid sulphuric cloud and haze layers, and a dense CO 2-dominated atmosphere (around 90 bars, significantly higher to our 10 bars CO 2 atmosphere case). Our results show that our dense CO 2 atmosphere cases present very low reflectivity due to the high water vapor absorptivity, however, the presence of cloud and haze layers, which are located in higher altitude levels, are expected to increase the planetary reflectivity. We tried to per-form simulations assuming Venus-like atmospheric conditions, but numerical instability issues (especially in the upper atmo-sphere) prevented the model from converging. These studies can also be particularly relevant to define observing strategies for the detection and characterization of Venus-like exoplanets, defined as post-runaway greenhouse planets (Kane et al. 2026). Our findings suggest that hazeless planets with optically thin atmospheres (i.e., low water contents, radiatively inactive gases, low surface pressures) are likely to appear dark. However, these results are highly sensitive to the assumed surface albedo. In this work, we adopted a low-albedo value of 0.2, as justified in Section 2.1. However, it is important to note that surface types with higher albedos, such as ultramafic (low-silica), feldspathic, granitoid or clay surfaces (Hu et al. 2012a), could increase the spectral reflectivity of scenarios with thin atmospheres. Further observations and analyses of planetary surfaces are required to determine their likely compositions and conclude on this ques-tion. Questions regarding water inventories on rocky exoplanets are still open. In this study, we focus on planets with relatively low amounts of water, because (1) the presence of large water reservoirs might be limited by water loss occurring during the long pre-main-sequence of M dwarf stars, during which the high stellar energy radiation might drive water dissociation and hy-drogen escape (Luger & Barnes 2015; Bolmont et al. 2017) and (2) the climate of highly irradiated planets with large water reser-voirs tend to reach the runaway greenhouse state (Leconte et al. 2013a; Kopparapu et al. 2017; Chaverot et al. 2022, 2023; Turbet 

> Article number, page 16 of 24

M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets 

et al. 2023). It is the case of Ross 128 b which is located interior to the HZ inner limit (Turbet et al. 2023) as calculated by Koppa-rapu et al. (2017). In this extreme climate state, all available wa-ter is vaporized in the atmosphere and the lower atmosphere be-comes optically thick, preventing the thermal radiation from the surface and the lower atmospheric layers to escape into space. In this scenario, we expect the planetary albedo to be extremely low due to the high absorptivity of the moist atmosphere. This is consistent with previous studies using 1D cloud-free models (Goldblatt et al. 2013) and 3D GCMs (Chaverot et al. 2023). An exhaustive investigation of the climate and atmospheres of close-in, rocky exoplanets is essential for developing a ro-bust database of synthetic reflectance spectra, thereby facilitat-ing the interpretation of future observations. This would require to expand the parameter space to cover a broader range of at-mospheric compositions and orbital configurations beyond those considered in this study. Defining representative reference or boundary cases help define the limits of the relevant parame-ter space, thereby providing constraints that refine the science cases and improve the interpretation of upcoming data. While processes such as atmospheric hazes can increase the planetary albedo and improve the prospects for detection, it is important to consider the scenarios derived from this work, which suggest a high probability that these warm exoplanets will exhibit low albedo and therefore appear optically dark. The synthetic spectra derived from the simulated scenarios in this study are generated at spectral resolutions of R = 300 or 

R = 500, depending on the correlated-k tables used for each gas mixture. These resolutions are significantly lower than the tar-geted performances of RISTRETTO, ANDES and PCS, which aim for spectral resolutions of R ≥ 100 000. To optimize the preparation for high-resolution observations, we need to increase the spectral resolution of the synthetic spectra. A next step will also consist in computing phase curves over the orbital period, considering the instrumental and optical con-straints. This can help further refine this study by including po-tential spatial heterogeneities in the atmosphere and cloud cov-erage. Dayside clouds or ice on the dayside surface could break the east /west symmetry. However, our results suggest an absence of ice and cloud coverage on the dayside. Therefore, we do not expect significant variations between orbital phases at +90 ◦ and 

−90 ◦.

6. Conclusions 

In this study, we first investigated the potential climate regimes of Ross 128 b, prototype of small, rocky exoplanets located close or interior to the inner edge of the Habitable Zone of M dwarf stars, for di ff erent orbital (synchronous and asynchronous rota-tions) and atmospheric setups, with various atmospheric gases (N 2 and CO 2), mean atmospheric surface pressures, and water inventories. Our results show that the climate of Ross 128 b, and by extension similar close-in, rocky exoplanets, is strongly sen-sitive to these parameters. This variability can induce a broad range of mean surface temperatures, from ∼250 to 650 K, and can drive the planet into distinct climate regimes with di ff erent implications for the observability. For most of the scenarios ex-plored, the planet can either reach a collapsed state, character-ized by a water-depleted atmosphere and nightside surface ice deposits, or a runaway state, which is a warmer state with fully vaporized water in the atmosphere. These two climate states are characteristic of the moist bistability observed in close-in, land rocky planets, as described in previous studies (e.g., Leconte et al. 2013b). Furthermore, we show that even a planet largely lo-cated outside the Habitable Zone, as defined in Kopparapu et al. (2017), may still sustain localized liquid water within the sur-face cold traps corresponding to the Rossby-wave gyres for a specific water inventory. This highlights the complexity of plan-etary climate systems and suggests that climate responses are not simply a linear function of the stellar irradiation (i.e., the orbital distance). Therefore, producing accurate synthetic observables requires GCM simulations across a broad parameter space. Then, we generated synthetic geometric albedo spectra across the RISTRETTO and ANDES instrument bandpasses for all simulated scenarios. This enables to evaluate the detection and atmospheric characterization prospects via the combined approach of high-contrast imaging and high-resolution spec-troscopy. Specifically, our synthetic spectra can provide more ac-curate albedo estimates, which are useful to determine the instru-ment detection limits (like planet-to-star contrast ratios) for tar-gets within this growing exoplanet population. Our results indi-cate that, in most cases, the geometric albedo remains relatively low, ranging from 0 to 0.2, which is below the commonly as-sumed value of 0.3 used to calculate the detection limits. There-fore, assuming the albedo of the Earth (in the visible, which is not covered by ANDES) may be overly inaccurate for the plan-ets of this population. This suggests a need to revisit the albedo assumptions based on this work to optimize the detectability pre-dictions in future studies.                            

> Acknowledgements. This work was carried out within the framework of the NCCR PlanetS, supported by the Swiss National Science Founda-tion under grants 51NF40_182901 and 51NF40_205606. E.B. acknowledges the financial support of the SNSF (grant number: 200021_197176 and 200020_215760). GC acknowledges the financial support of the SNSF (grant number: P500PT_217840). This research has made use of the Astrophysics Data System, funded by NASA under Cooperative Agreement 80NSSC25M7105.

Data availability 

The GCM outputs corresponding to each simulation setups are available here: https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo. 19208230 . Additional data can be shared on request to the corresponding author. The Generic-PCM (including documen-tation) can be downloaded from the SVN repository https: //svn.lmd.jussieu.fr/Planeto/trunk/LMDZ.GENERIC/ .The Pytmosph3R documentation can be found in: 

https://perso.astrophy.u-bordeaux.fr/~jleconte/ pytmosph3r-doc/index.html .

References 

> Anglada-Escudé, G., Amado, P. J., Barnes, J., et al. 2016, Nature, 536, 437 Astudillo-Defru, N., Forveille, T., Bonfils, X., et al. 2017, A&A, 602, A88 Batalha, N. M., Rowe, J. F., Bryson, S. T., et al. 2013, ApJS, 204, 24 Bolmont, E., Libert, A.-S., Leconte, J., & Selsis, F. 2016, A&A, 591, A106 Bolmont, E., Selsis, F., Owen, J. E., et al. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 3728 Bonfils, X., Astudillo-Defru, N., Díaz, R., et al. 2018, A&A, 613, A25 Boutle, I. A., Mayne, N. J., Drummond, B., et al. 2017, A&A, 601, A120 Bower, D. J., Thompson, M. A., Hakim, K., Tian, M., & Sossi, P. A. 2025, ApJ, 995, 59 Bugatti, M., Lovis, C., Billot, N., et al. 2025, A&A, 702, A230 Buratti, B. J., Hillier, J. K., & Wang, M. 1996, Icarus, 124, 490 Caldas, A., Leconte, J., Selsis, F., et al. 2019, A&A, 623, A161 Cassidy, W. & Hapke, B. 1975, Icarus, 25, 371 Chaverot, G., Bolmont, E., & Turbet, M. 2023, A&A, 680, A103 Chaverot, G., Turbet, M., Bolmont, E., & Leconte, J. 2022, A&A, 658, A40 Del Genio, A. D., Way, M. J., Amundsen, D. S., et al. 2019, Astrobiology, 19, 99 Drant, T., Tian, M., Carrasco, N., & Heng, K. 2025, A&A, 698, A76 Dressing, C. D. & Charbonneau, D. 2015, ApJ, 807, 45 Espinoza, N., Allen, N. H., Glidden, A., et al. 2025, ApJ, 990, L52 Falco, A., Zingales, T., Pluriel, W., & Leconte, J. 2022, A&A, 658, A41

Article number, page 17 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised 

Fauchez, T. J., Ducrot, E., Rackham, B. V., et al. 2025a, ApJ, 989, 170 Fauchez, T. J., Turbet, M., Villanueva, G. L., et al. 2019, ApJ, 887, 194 Fauchez, T. J., Villanueva, G. L., Kofman, V., Suissa, G., & Kopparapu, R. K. 2025b, Astronomy and Computing, 53, 100982 Forget, F. & Leconte, J. 2014, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, 372, 20130084 Fulton, B. J. & Petigura, E. A. 2018, AJ, 156, 264 Gill, A. E. 1980, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Meteorological Society, 106, 447 Gillon, M., Ducrot, E., Bell, T. J., et al. 2025, Nature Astronomy, arXiv:2509.02128 Gillon, M., Jehin, E., Lederer, S. M., et al. 2016, Nature, 533, 221 Gillon, M., Triaud, A. H., Demory, B.-O., et al. 2017, Nature, 542, 456 Glidden, A., Ranjan, S., Seager, S., et al. 2025, ApJ, 990, L53 Goldblatt, C., Robinson, T. D., Zahnle, K. J., & Crisp, D. 2013, Nature Geo-science, 6, 661 Greene, T. P., Bell, T. J., Ducrot, E., et al. 2023, Nature, 618, 39 Hammond, M., Tsai, S.-M., & Pierrehumbert, R. T. 2020, ApJ, 901, 78 He, M. Y., Ford, E. B., & Ragozzine, D. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 4575 Hourdin, F., Musat, I., Bony, S., et al. 2006, Climate Dynamics, 27, 787 Hu, R., Ehlmann, B. L., & Seager, S. 2012a, ApJ, 752, 7 Hu, R., Seager, S., & Bains, W. 2012b, ApJ, 761, 166 Jaziri, A. Y., Carrasco, N., & Charnay, B. 2026, Nature Scientific Report, arXiv:2601.18324 Kane, S. R., Bott, K. M., Goodis Gordon, K. E., et al. 2026, PASP, 138, 024404 Karman, T., Gordon, I. E., van der Avoird, A., et al. 2019, Icarus, 328, 160 Kasper, M., Cerpa Urra, N., Pathak, P., et al. 2021, The Messenger, 182, 38 Kasting, J. F. 1988, Icarus, 74, 472 Kasting, J. F., Whitmire, D. P., & Reynolds, R. T. 1993, Icarus, 101, 108 Kodama, T., Genda, H., O’ishi, R., Abe-Ouchi, A., & Abe, Y. 2019, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 124, 2306 Koll, D. D. B. & Abbot, D. S. 2016, ApJ, 825, 99 Kopparapu, R. K., Ramirez, R., Kasting, J. F., et al. 2013, ApJ, 765, 131 Kopparapu, R. K., Ramirez, R. M., SchottelKotte, J., et al. 2014, ApJ, 787, L29 Kopparapu, R. k., Wolf, E. T., Arney, G., et al. 2017, ApJ, 845, 5 Kopparapu, R. k., Wolf, E. T., Haqq-Misra, J., et al. 2016, ApJ, 819, 84 Kreidberg, L. & Stevenson, K. B. 2025, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 122, e2416190122 Leconte, J. 2021, A&A, 645, A20 Leconte, J., Forget, F., Charnay, B., Wordsworth, R., & Pottier, A. 2013a, Nature, 504, 268 Leconte, J., Forget, F., Charnay, B., et al. 2013b, A&A, 554, A69 Lim, O., Benneke, B., Doyon, R., et al. 2023, ApJ, 955, L22 Lovis, C., Blind, N., Chazelas, B., et al. 2022, in Society of Photo-Optical Instru-mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 12184, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IX, ed. C. J. Evans, J. J. Bryant, & K. Motohara, 121841Q Lovis, C., Blind, N., Chazelas, B., et al. 2024, in Society of Photo-Optical Instru-mentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 13096, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy X, ed. J. J. Bryant, K. Moto-hara, & J. R. D. Vernet, 130961I Lovis, C., Snellen, I., Mouillet, D., et al. 2017, A&A, 599, A16 Luger, R. & Barnes, R. 2015, Astrobiology, 15, 119 Madden, J. H. & Kaltenegger, L. 2018, Astrobiology, 18, 1559 Mallama, A. 2017, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1703.02670 Mann, A. W., Feiden, G. A., Gaidos, E., Boyajian, T., & von Braun, K. 2015, ApJ, 804, 64 Marconi, A., Abreu, M., Adibekyan, V., et al. 2022, in Society of Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference Series, Vol. 12184, Ground-based and Airborne Instrumentation for Astronomy IX, ed. C. J. Evans, J. J. Bryant, & K. Motohara, 1218424 Matsuno, T. 1966, Journal of the Meteorological Society of Japan, 44, 25 Maurel, A., Turbet, M., Ducrot, E., et al. 2025, A&A, 701, A193 Maurice, M., Dasgupta, R., & Hassanzadeh, P. 2024, A&A, 688, A47 Meador, W. E. & Weaver, W. R. 1980, Journal of the Atmospheric Sciences, 37, 630 Mignon, L., Delfosse, X., Meunier, N., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A146 Milankovitch, M. 1941, Kanon der Erdebestrahlung und seine anwendung auf das eiszeitenproblem (Koniglich Serbische Akademie) Mlawer, E. J., Payne, V. H., Moncet, J.-L., et al. 2012, Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London Series A, 370, 2520 Newton, E. R., Irwin, J., Charbonneau, D., et al. 2016, ApJ, 821, 93 Palle, E., Biazzo, K., Bolmont, E., et al. 2025, Experimental Astronomy, 59, 29 Parc, L., Bouchy, F., Venturini, J., Dorn, C., & Helled, R. 2024, A&A, 688, A59 Petigura, E. A., Howard, A. W., & Marcy, G. W. 2013, Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Science, 110, 19273 Piaulet-Ghorayeb, C., Benneke, B., Turbet, M., et al. 2025, ApJ, 989, 181 Pierrehumbert, R. T. 2010, Principles of Planetary Climate Pieters, C. M. & Noble, S. K. 2016, Journal of Geophysical Research (Planets), 121, 1865 Quirino, D., Gilli, G., Kaltenegger, L., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 523, L86 Rackham, B. V., Apai, D., & Giampapa, M. S. 2019, The Astronomical Journal, 157, 96, arXiv: 1812.06184 Rajpurohit, A. S., Reylé, C., Allard, F., et al. 2013, A&A, 556, A15 Ribas, I., Gregg, M. D., Boyajian, T. S., & Bolmont, E. 2017, A&A, 603, A58 Roccetti, G., Bugliaro, L., Gödde, F., et al. 2024, Atmospheric Measurement Techniques, 17, 6025 Roccetti, G., Emde, C., Sterzik, M. F., et al. 2025, A&A, 697, A170 Selsis, F., Wordsworth, R. D., & Forget, F. 2011, A&A, 532, A1 Showman, A. P. & Polvani, L. M. 2011, ApJ, 738, 71 Showman, A. P., Wordsworth, R. D., Merlis, T. M., & Kaspi, Y. 2013, in Com-parative Climatology of Terrestrial Planets, ed. S. J. Mackwell, A. A. Simon-Miller, J. W. Harder, & M. A. Bullock, 277–327 Snellen, I., de Kok, R., Birkby, J. L., et al. 2015, A&A, 576, A59 Souto, D., Unterborn, C. T., Smith, V. V., et al. 2018, ApJ, 860, L15 Suárez Mascareño, A., Artigau, É., Mignon, L., et al. 2025, A&A, 700, A11 Taniguchi, K., Kodama, T., Turbet, M., et al. 2026, ApJ, 1000, 99 Toon, O. B., McKay, C. P., Ackerman, T. P., & Santhanam, K. 1989, J. Geo-phys. Res., 94, 16287 Turbet, M., Bolmont, E., Chaverot, G., et al. 2021, Nature, 598, 276 Turbet, M., Bolmont, E., Leconte, J., et al. 2018, A&A, 612, A86 Turbet, M., Fauchez, T. J., Leconte, J., et al. 2023, A&A, 679, A126 Turbet, M., Leconte, J., Selsis, F., et al. 2016, A&A, 596, A112 Turbet, M., Tran, H., Pirali, O., et al. 2019, Icarus, 321, 189 Valente, E. F. S. & Correia, A. C. M. 2022, A&A, 665, A130 Way, M. J., Del Genio, A. D., Kiang, N. Y., et al. 2016, Geophys. Res. Lett., 43, 8376 Wolf, E. T., Kopparapu, R. K., & Haqq-Misra, J. 2019, ApJ, 877, 35 Wolf, E. T., Schwieterman, E. W., Haqq-Misra, J., et al. 2025, The Planetary Science Journal, 6, 231 Wordsworth, R. D., Forget, F., Selsis, F., et al. 2010, A&A, 522, A22 Wordsworth, R. D., Forget, F., Selsis, F., et al. 2011, ApJ, 733, L48 Wright, D. J., Wittenmyer, R. A., Tinney, C. G., Bentley, J. S., & Zhao, J. 2016, ApJ, 817, L20 Yamashiki, Y. A., Maehara, H., Airapetian, V., et al. 2019, ApJ, 881, 114 Yang, J., Boué, G., Fabrycky, D. C., & Abbot, D. S. 2014, ApJ, 787, L2 Yang, J., Cowan, N. B., & Abbot, D. S. 2013, ApJ, 771, L45 Yang, J., Ji, W., & Zeng, Y. 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4, 58 Yang, J., Leconte, J., Wolf, E. T., et al. 2019, ApJ, 875, 46 Zeng, L., Jacobsen, S. B., Sasselov, D. D., et al. 2019, Proceedings of the Na-tional Academy of Science, 116, 9723 Zieba, S., Kreidberg, L., Coy, B. P., et al. 2026, Nature Astronomy [arXiv:2605.00100 ]Zieba, S., Kreidberg, L., Ducrot, E., et al. 2023, Nature, 620, 746 

Article number, page 18 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets 

Appendix A: Calculations of the dimensionless Rossby deformation length 

Following Leconte et al. (2013b), the dimensionless equatorial Rossby deformation length is defined as 

LRo 

Rp

=

s

N H 

2 Ω Rp

, (A.1) where LRo is the equatorial Rossby deformation radius, Rp is the planetary radius, N is the Brunt-Väisälä frequency, H is the pressure scale height and Ω is the planet rotation rate. The Brunt-Väisälä frequency describes the stratification stability of a fluid to vertical perturbations. In a dry stably stratified atmosphere, it is given by 

N2 = gT

gcp

+ dT

dz

!

, (A.2) where g is the gravitational acceleration, T is the temperature, cp is the heat capacity of the gas at constant pressure and d T/dz is the lapse rate. The pressure scale height is given by 

H = kB Tma g , (A.3) where kB is the Boltzmann constant and ma is the mean molecular weight of the air, defined as ma = M/NA, where M is the molar mass and NA is the Avogadro constant. We assume an isothermal atmosphere, which gives the same expression as in Leconte et al. (2013b) 

LRo 

Rp

=

s kB T 1/2

2 Ω Rp ma c1/2p

. (A.4) We use the equilibrium temperature of Ross 128 b for T , calculated assuming a Bond albedo of 0.3. Considering an N 2-dominated atmosphere, the molar mass is set to M = 28 × 10 −3 kg mol −1 and the specific heat capacity is cp = 1003 .16 J K −1 kg −1.Assuming a synchronous rotation, this gives LRo /Rp = 1.2. We find a similar result with T = 230 K, which is the lowest mean surface temperature derived from our GCM simulations. With T = 482 K (highest mean surface temperature from our N 2 atmospheres simulations), the ratio increases to LRo /Rp = 1.4. For a CO 2-dominated atmosphere, with M = 44 × 10 −3 kg mol −1 and cp = 840 J K −1 kg −1, we find LRo /Rp = 1.0 with the equi-librium temperature and LRo /Rp = 1.3 with the maximum mean surface temperature of 671 K derived from our GCM simulations. Our calculations are performed with specific assumptions and simplifications. More accurate calculations should be done, but it is out of scope of this study. 

Appendix B: Complementary simulation for Case 2B 

The variables shown in Figure B.1 were computed for a global water content of 8 cm GEL initially in liquid phase at the surface. As in Case 2B, this setup also shows temporal variations in the surface condensation of liquid water, correlated with the variations of atmospheric water vapor concentration (described in Section 3.1).   

> Fig. B.1. Temporal evolutions of the column-integrated water vapor (top panel), water clouds, surface liquid and ice water density (middle panel) for a simulation setup similar to Case 2B, but for a global water content equivalent to 8 cm GEL initially in liquid phase at the surface. The mean values are represented by the solid lines, while the minimum and maximum values are defined by the filled areas in the first two panels. The thin lines show the maximum values of the corresponding variables of Case 2B. The lower panel represents the deviations of the total water mass content for each quantity from its respective initial value. Article number, page 19 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised

Appendix C: Complementary maps for Section 3 

> Appendix C.1: Effect of the atmospheric composition on the climate

In this section, we present the maps of our GCM results corresponding to Cases 2, 4 and 6 under dry and wet conditions. Figure C.1 presents the surface temperatures and TOA albedo for Cases 2, 4 and 6 under dry conditions. Figure C.2 shows the surface tempera-tures, atmospheric water vapor, water clouds and TOA albedo for Cases 2, 4 and 6 under wet conditions (with 8.3 cm GEL of water inventory). 

Fig. C.1: Latitude-longitude maps of surface temperature and TOA albedo for Cases 2, 4 and 6 under dry conditions. The variables are averaged over ∼50 orbits. The solid white line contour corresponds to the 273.15 K isotherm below which water (if present) freezes. The dashed white line on the albedo color bar corresponds to the surface albedo. 

Fig. C.2: Latitude-longitude maps of surface temperature, column-integrated water vapor, water cloud column and TOA albedo for Cases 2, 4 and 6 under wet conditions (i.e., with a global water content of 8.3 cm GEL). Here Case 2 corresponds to Case 2B. The variables are averaged over ∼50 orbits for Cases 2 and 4 and ∼26 orbits for Case 6. The dotted white line contour corresponds to the location of surface liquid water. The dashed white line on the albedo color bar corresponds to the surface albedo. 

> Article number, page 20 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets

The case with 1 bar of CO 2 atmosphere presents the highest surface temperatures among the three cases for both dry and wet conditions (Figures C.1 and C.2). In dry conditions, Figure C.1 shows for Case 6 a high temperature contrast between the dayside and the nightside of ∼209 K, about 100 K higher compared to the corresponding wet conditions. 

Appendix C.2: Effect of the atmospheric surface pressure on the climate 

This section presents the maps of the GCM simulations corresponding to Cases 1, 2 and 3 (N 2 atmospheres) and Cases 5 and 6 (CO 2 atmospheres). Figure C.3 presents the surface temperatures and TOA albedo for Cases 2 and 3 in dry conditions. Figure C.4 shows the surface temperatures, water vapor, water clouds, water ice surface density and TOA albedo for Cases 1, 2 and 3 under wet conditions (with 8.3 cm GEL of water inventory). Figure C.5 shows the surface temperatures, water ice surface density, CO 2

ice surface density and TOA albedo for Cases 5 and 6 under wet conditions (with 0.83 cm GEL of water inventory).   

> Fig. C.3. Latitude-longitude maps of surface tempera-ture and TOA albedo for Cases 2 and 3 under dry condi-tions. The variables are averaged over ∼50 orbits. The solid white line contour corresponds to the 273.15 K isotherm below which water (if present) freezes. The dashed white line on the albedo color bar corresponds to the surface albedo.

Fig. C.4: Latitude-longitude maps of surface temperature, column-integrated water vapor, water clouds, water ice surface density and TOA albedo for Cases 1, 2 and 3 under wet conditions (i.e., with a global water content of 8.3 cm GEL). Here Case 2 corresponds to Case 2B. The variables are averaged over ∼50 orbits. The solid white line contour corresponds to the 273.15 K isotherm below which water (if present) freezes. The dotted white line contour corresponds to the location of surface liquid water. The dashed white line on the albedo color bar corresponds to the surface albedo.      

> Article number, page 21 of 24 A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised
> Fig. C.5. Latitude-longitude maps of surface tempera-ture, water ice surface density, CO 2ice surface density and TOA albedo for Cases 5 and 6 under wet conditions (i.e., with a global water content of 0.83 cm GEL). The variables are averaged over ∼26 orbits. The solid white line contour corresponds to the 273.15 K isotherm be-low which water (if present) freezes. The dotted red line contour corresponds to the 173.15 K isotherm be-low which CO 2condenses at 0.1 bar. The dashed white line on the albedo color bar corresponds to the surface albedo.

For N 2-dominated atmospheres, Figure C.3 suggests that increasing the surface pressure from 1 to 10 bars (under dry conditions) raises the mean surface temperature from approximately 250 K to 283 K. In Figure C.4, the case of a thin atmosphere (0.1 bar) exhibits the highest temperature contrast among the wet scenarios with ∼286 K, which is about 200 K higher than in the case of a dense atmosphere (10 bars). This behavior is due to the low e ffi ciency of the atmospheric heat redistribution at low pressure. In the case at 10 bars of surface pressure under dry conditions, the nightside temperatures remain below the freezing point of water. However, they are high enough in the water-rich scenario to sustain water vapor within the atmosphere. Therefore, decreasing the surface pressure from 1 bar to 0.1 bar in the transient climate state of Case 2B, assuming a similar initial water content, shifts the climate toward the collapsed state, and raising the surface pressure by a factor of 10 in Case 2B leads to a shift toward a runaway climate state, as represented by Case 2C. Moreover, Figure C.4 shows that the surface temperatures and water vapor in Case 3 (in wet conditions) present more uniform distributions across the planet compared to Case 2C (see Figures 3 and 4), showing an eff ective meridional heat redistribution in dense atmospheres. In the case of CO 2-dominated atmospheres, Figure C.5 reveals that the low-pressure scenario exhibits the lowest mean surface temperature at ∼249 K (roughly ∼150 K lower than the 1 bar case) and shows the highest day /night thermal contrast ( ∼276 K). 

> Article number, page 22 of 24 M. Houelle et al.: A broad exploration of climate and observability of close-in rocky exoplanets
> Appendix C.3: Comparison synchronous/asynchronous rotations

In this section, we present the maps corresponding the GCM results for Cases 2 and 6 (under wet conditions) for synchronous and asynchronous rotations. Here Case 2 assuming synchronous rotation corresponds to Case 2B. Figure C.6 shows the surface temperatures, water vapor, clouds and TOA albedo. 

Fig. C.6: Latitude-longitude maps of surface temperature, column-integrated water vapor, water clouds and TOA albedo for Cases 2 and 6 (under wet conditions, i.e., with 8.3 cm GEL of water inventory) for synchronous (1:1 resonance, 0° obliquity) and asyn-chronous (5:2 resonance, 79° obliquity) configurations. The variables are averaged over ∼50 (Case 2B), ∼20 (Case 2, 5:2 resonance), 

∼26 (Case 6, 1:1 resonance) and ∼5 orbits (Case 6, 5:2 resonance). The dotted white line contour corresponds to the location of surface liquid water. The dashed white line on the albedo color bar corresponds to the surface albedo. 

> Article number, page 23 of 24

A&A proofs: manuscript no. aanda_revised 

Appendix D: Bond and geometric albedo for all scenarios 

Table D.1 summarizes the mean Bond and geometric albedos. The mean geometric albedo are computed with Pytmosph3R within the spectral bandpasses of RISTRETTO and ANDES (including the Y, J and H bands covered with the SCAO mode of ANDES) for all configurations simulated with the Generic PCM. Table D.1: Albedo values computed for all scenarios. Scenario GEL of water (cm) ABond * Ag, RISTRETTO ** Ag, Y band ** Ag, J band ** Ag, H band ** 

Synchronous rotations scenarios (1:1 resonance) 0.1 bar N 2

0.83 0.20 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 8.3 0.20 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.12 1 bar N 2

0 0.21 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 4 0.19 0.13 0.12 0.11 0.11 6 0.19 0.13 0.12 0.11 0.11 8.3 0.11 0.11 0.07 0.05 0.06 83.3 0.05 0.07 0.04 0.01 0.02 10 bars N 2

0 0.24 0.20 0.14 0.13 0.12 8.3 0.12 0.16 0.08 0.04 0.05 83.3 0.07 0.11 0.04 0.01 0.01 1 bar N 2 + 376 ppm CO 2 0 0.20 0.13 0.12 0.12 0.12 8.3 0.11 0.11 0.07 0.05 0.06 0.1 bar CO 2 0.83 0.19 0.12 0.12 0.12 0.11 1 bar CO 2

0 0.15 0.13 0.12 0.09 0.05 0.83 0.11 0.13 0.09 0.06 0.03 8.3 0.07 0.11 0.06 0.03 0.01 10 bars CO 2 83.3 0.06 0.12 0.02 0.00 0.00 Asynchronous rotations scenarios (5:2 resonance) 1 bar N 2 8.3 0.11 0.11 0.07 0.05 0.06 1 bar N 2 + 376 ppm CO 2 8.3 0.11 0.11 0.08 0.06 0.06 1 bar CO 2 8.3 0.08 0.11 0.07 0.03 0.01 

Notes. (*) Mean Bond albedo computed from the Generic PCM data. (** ) Mean geometric albedo computed with Pytmosph3R for the RISTRETTO bandpass and the YJH bands covered with the SCAO mode of ANDES. Article number, page 24 of 24