Title: The Dynamics of Planetary Ejection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.00173v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 00:11:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
> Draft version August 4, 2026
> Typeset using L ATEX twocolumn style in AASTeX7.0.1

The Dynamics of Planetary Ejection 

Malena Rice ,1 William DeRocco ,2, 3 and Sean N. Raymond 4

> 1Department of Astronomy, Yale University, 219 Prospect Street, New Haven, CT 06511, USA
> 2Maryland Center for Fundamental Physics, University of Maryland, College Park, 4296 Stadium Drive, College Park, MD 20742, USA
> 3Department of Physics & Astronomy, The Johns Hopkins University, 3400 N. Charles Street, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA
> 4Laboratoire d’astrophysique de Bordeaux, Univ. Bordeaux, CNRS, B18N, all´ ee Geoffroy Saint-Hilaire, F-33615 Pessac, France

ABSTRACT The ubiquity of free-floating planets inferred from microlensing and direct imaging surveys suggests that planetary ejection—a process in which planets initially born encircling a stellar host become gravi-tationally unbound—is common. Four overarching mechanisms have been proposed to induce planetary ejection: close approaches of neighboring planets, instabilities in binary or multi-star systems, stellar and planetary flybys, and post-main-sequence stellar evolution. Here we review the mechanisms under-lying planetary ejection, as well as predictions derived from each. Current and upcoming microlensing surveys offer the potential to test existing models and distinguish between potential planetary ejec-tion mechanisms, offering further insight into the demographic-level architectures of exoplanets across stellar environments. 

Keywords: Free floating planets (549) — Exoplanet dynamics (490) — Exoplanets (498) — Gravita-tional microlensing (672) Contents 1. Introduction 22. Close approaches between neighboring planets 32.1. Underlying principles 32.1.1. The Safronov number 32.1.2. Angular momentum deficit 62.2. Evidence for scattering-induced planetary ejection in the solar system 72.3. Evidence for scattering-induced planetary ejection in extrasolar systems 82.4. Predictions and implications: planet-planet scattering 92.4.1. The present-day population of bound planets 92.4.2. The mass distribution of FFPs 10 2.4.3. The velocity distribution of FFPs 11 3. Instabilities in systems with bound stellar companions 12 3.1. Instabilities of circumstellar planets in binary systems 12 

> Corresponding author: Malena Rice malena.rice@yale.edu

3.1.1. Circumstellar planets in close stellar binaries 12 3.1.2. Circumstellar planets in wide stellar binaries 14 3.2. Instabilities of circumbinary planets 14 3.3. Planetary orbital instabilities in multi-star systems 14 3.4. Predictions and implications: instabilities in systems with bound stellar companions 15 4. Flyby-induced ejections 16 4.1. Flyby occurrence rates 16 4.2. Cross-sections for flyby interactions 16 4.3. Potential outcomes from stellar flyby interactions 17 4.4. Substellar object flybys 18 4.5. Predictions and implications: flyby encounters 18 4.5.1. Predictions and implications: flybys in embedded clusters 18 4.5.2. Predictions and implications: flybys in evolved open clusters 19 4.5.3. Predictions and implications: flybys in globular clusters 19 arXiv:2608.00173v1 [astro-ph.EP] 31 Jul 2026 24.5.4. How often do planets remain bound to the host cluster after being liberated from their host star? 20 5. Post-main-sequence planetary ejection 21 5.1. The general variable-mass two-body problem 21 5.2. The mass-loss index Ψ 21 5.3. Direct ejection from slow mass loss 21 5.4. Direct ejection in the impulse approximation 22 5.5. Post-main-sequence planetary close encounters 22 5.6. Increased susceptibility to flyby-induced ejection 23 5.7. White dwarf kicks 23 5.8. The role of binarity in planetary ejection for evolving stellar systems 24 5.9. Predictions and implications: post-main-sequence planetary ejection 24 6. Discussion 25 6.1. Relative rates of FFP production 25 6.2. Observed properties of candidate FFPs 27 6.3. Sub-planetary-mass ejected bodies 28 6.4. Future prospects 29 7. Summary 30  

> 1.

INTRODUCTION The signatures of multi-scale dynamic environments are imprinted on today’s census of observed planetary systems. Both theoretical and observational constraints have indicated that planets’ evolved configurations are often not representative of the initial outcomes of planet formation (J. C. B. Papaloizou & C. Terquem 2006; M. B. Davies et al. 2014; A. Morbidelli 2018; S. N. Raymond et al. 2020). Instead, a given main-sequence (or post-main-sequence) system reflects the integrated sculpting of millions to billions of years of processing. Orbits may evolve substantially over a system’s lifetime, undergoing shifts and instabilities. In many scenarios, these orbital shifts may result in planets being ejected from their host systems. Numerical simulations indicate that planetary ejec-tion is a common outcome of dynamical interactions between planets and their perturbers (S. J. Weiden-schilling & F. Marzari 1996; F. A. Rasio & E. B. Ford 1996; D. N. C. Lin & S. Ida 1997; S. Chatterjee et al. 2008; E. B. Ford 2014). Observational constraints, too, point toward a high rate of planetary ejection: mi-crolensing surveys have unveiled a vast population of planets orbiting within the Milky Way, unbound from any host star (P. Mr´ oz et al. 2017; A. Gould et al. 2022; T. Sumi et al. 2023). Correcting for survey bi-ases, these discoveries indicate that such “free-floating planets” (FFPs)—also commonly referred to as “rogue planets”—are common, at of order ≈ 20 FFPs with masses 0 .33 < M/M ⊕ < 6660 per star in the Milky Way (T. Sumi et al. 2023). While planetary ejection is a ubiquitous process, the specific outcomes of this process are elusive to directly pinpoint. Ejected planets have been removed from their host systems such that they are not, by default, illumi-nated by any bright source. This renders them effec-tively invisible to the historically lucrative transit and radial velocity methods that have been leveraged to dis-cover and characterize most known exoplanets to date (J. L. Christiansen et al. 2025). Furthermore, some plan-etary ejection mechanisms suggest that FFPs may stem from birth populations that are largely distinct from the well-characterized census of bound exoplanets—a near-inevitability, for example, for many planets born into orbits that are not long-term stable. This poses a challenge as well as an opportunity. Plan-etary ejection studies offer a complementary avenue to-ward understanding regions of parameter space in plan-etary systems that are only minimally accessible with most exoplanet detection and characterization methods. A bridge between the theoretical and observational con-straints on planetary ejection provides a crucial piece of the puzzle when interpreting the demographic-level evolutionary cycles of planetary systems. Depending on the birth properties and environmen-tal factors shaping a planetary system, a range of dy-namical mechanisms may induce instabilities that lead to planetary ejection. Indeed, any close encounters or instability-inducing mechanisms, such as planet-planet close approaches, dynamical perturbations from com-panion stars, stellar and planetary flybys, and host star evolution, have the potential to trigger the ejection of one or more initially bound planets. We provide a schematic overview of these instability-triggering mechanisms in Figure 1 for guidance. In this manuscript, which is designed as a pedagogical overview of the dynamics of planetary ejection, we begin by dis-cussing the underlying mechanisms that may trigger planetary ejection. We first consider interactions be-tween neighboring planets in Section 2, then examine the influence of bound stellar companions in Section 3. We describe potential ejection from flybys of unbound objects in Section 4. Lastly, we discuss the prospects for planetary ejection from post-main-sequence stellar evolution in Section 5. We discuss the relative contri-butions of each planetary ejection mechanism as well as 3 

> Figure 1. Schematic overview of instability-inducing mechanisms through which planets may be ejected from a system. These mechanisms, each discussed throughout this work, include close approaches between neighboring planets (top left; Section 2), binary-induced instabilities (top center and right, and bottom left; Section 3), flyby encounters (bottom center; Section 4), and post-main-sequence orbital evolution (bottom right; Section 5).

future prospects to constrain the planetary ejection rate in Section 6. We conclude with a summary of major takeaways in Section 7.  

> 2.

CLOSE APPROACHES BETWEEN NEIGHBORING PLANETS Stellar systems that host two or more planets around a single star often undergo instabilities in which neigh-boring planets experience close encounters. In this pro-cess, commonly referred to as “planet-planet scatter-ing,” the close encounters may cause one or more plan-ets to be scattered outward and unbound from the sys-tem. Conservation of the system’s angular momentum implies that, in the process of planet-planet scattering, the lowest-mass planets tend to be ejected, whereas the highest-mass planets typically remain bound to the sys-tem. The remaining, bound planets are often left on dynamically excited (eccentric and/or inclined) orbits from the encounter. In Section 2.1, we first outline some underlying princi-ples that can be applied to describe systems’ capacity for planetary ejection through planet-planet scattering. We then provide a brief overview of the evidence for planet-planet scattering in the solar system in Section 2.2 and an analogous overview for exoplanet systems in Section 2.3. We close with predictions for the free-floating planet population, drawn from single-star scattering scenarios, in Section 2.4. 2.1. Underlying principles 

In this section we describe quantitative metrics that provide intuition for planetary systems’ typical pro-clivity toward planetary ejection, as well as relevant timescales for instability. 2.1.1. The Safronov number 

Depending on the physical conditions of the system, close encounters between two bodies in a planetary sys-tem may result in either a collision or an ejection. The outcome of a close encounter can be understood from first principles through examining a simple scenario in which two bodies undergo a grazing encounter. Consider a body with mass m approaching a planet with mass Mp and radius Rp from a large distance x,4              

> Figure 2. Schematic depiction of the grazing-encounter sce-nario considered in Section 2.1.1, through which the Safronov number, which is used to determine the likelihood of colli-sions vs. ejections as the outcome of close encounters, is de-rived. Here xis an initially large distance from which mass
> m, at initial velocity vi, approaches a planet with mass Mp
> and Rpwith impact parameter b.The final velocity vfof mass mis denoted at the point of closest approach during its grazing encounter with mass Mp.

with impact parameter b and initial velocity vi (Figure 2). Both m and Mp are in orbit around a star with mass 

M∗, where M∗ ≫ m, M p.From conservation of energy, the final velocity vf when mass m reaches a grazing encounter with mass Mp can be obtained through the expression 12 mv 2 

> i

− GM pm

√x2 + b2 = 12 mv 2 

> f

− GM pmRp

. (1) For x → ∞ , 1 /√x2 + b2 ≈ 0 and Equation 1 simplifies to 

v2 

> f

= v2 

> i

+ v2esc ,p, (2) where the escape velocity vesc ,p from planet Mp is given as 

vesc ,p =

s

2GM p

Rp

. (3) To examine the case of ejection, we are interested in the scenario in which mass m reaches a final velocity vf

above the escape velocity of the system vesc ,∗. That is, we require 

vf > v esc ,∗ (for ejection) , (4) where 

vesc ,∗ =

r 2GM ∗

r (5) to escape from an orbit around the host star, for planet-star distance r at a given time. Inspection of Equation 2 together with the condi-tion of Equation 4 reveals that for any encounter veloc-ity vi, close encounters with a neighboring planet will lead to a boost above the system’s escape velocity for 

v2esc ,p/v 2esc ,∗ > 1. Thus, the parameter Θ, defined as Θ ≡ v2esc ,p

v2esc ,∗

, (6) is useful in demonstrating whether encounters will typ-ically lead to ejections—the alternative being either (1) collisions or (2) close approaches in which both bodies remain bound to the host star without merging. Θ is commonly referred to as the “Safronov number,” and, in this simplified scenario, ejections occur where Θ > 1. Rearranging using Equations 3 and 5, the Safronov num-ber may also be written as Θ = MprRpM∗

. (7) Equations 6 and 7 provide a generalized version of the Safronov number, which is often approximated specifi-cally for circular orbits. For circular orbits, a = r and Equation 7 may be updated accordingly. In particular, the instantaneous orbital speed at a given separation r

from the star is 

vorb =

r

GM ∗

 2

r − 1

a



. (8) Therefore, in the limit of a circular orbit, vesc ,∗ =√2vorb . In this case, the Safronov number may be rewritten as its commonly reported form Θ = 12

v2esc ,p

v2orb 

(for e = 0) . (9) The above approximations assume no energy trans-fer between the planet and the ejected body, and they do not take into consideration the encounter geometry (instead assuming a grazing geometry), which in prac-tice influences whether m reaches the system’s escape velocity (e.g. S. J. Weidenschilling 1975). Because of these limitations, the requirement for a planet to effi-ciently eject its neighbors may be more safely written as Θ ≫ 1. For planets in the regime Θ ≪ 1, close ap-proaches by neighboring bodies tend to instead lead to collisions. Equation 7 demonstrates that, in general, planets on wider orbits are more efficient at ejecting neighboring material. The majority of the currently known exoplan-ets were detected via the transit method, such that the census is heavily biased toward systems in which plan-ets are difficult to eject: those in which planets are on extremely tight orbits with Θ ≪ 1, with a strong poten-tial well that typically culminates in collisions, rather than ejections, from close encounters. M. C. Wyatt 5      

> Figure 3. Maximum Safronov number of known, bound planets shown as a function of semimajor axis (left) and eccentricity (right), as a scatter plot (bottom) and histogram (top). The histograms are each normalized to peak at 1 for a clearer comparison between samples. Only planets with measured, nonzero uncertainties in orbital eccentricity are included. Though these planets remain bound to their host systems, the elevated eccentricities of planets with high Safronov numbers suggests that they may have ejected neighboring companions in their past histories. Because the Safronov number varies with location in the orbit, we take the maximum Safronov number Θ max corresponding to apoastron, where r=a(1 + e). The present-day maximum Safronov number calculated here is a proxy for the true value of interest, which is the pre-scattering Safronov number. This is an updated version of an earlier result first demonstrated by E. B. Ford & F. A. Rasio (2008).

et al. (2017) developed a mapping of the typical out-comes from close approaches with the known census of exoplanets—assuming circular orbits and encounters with a single planet—demonstrating this bias. Wider-orbiting known exoplanets—largely discovered through the radial-velocity or direct-imaging methods— often have higher Safronov numbers. E. B. Ford & F. A. Rasio (2008) showed that planets with higher Safronov numbers typically have higher-eccentricity or-bits than those with lower Safronov numbers, suggest-ing that neighboring planets may have been previously ejected from the systems. Updating this result with the current set of known planets (as of 7/1/2026) and using Equation 7 to calculate the maximum Safronov number for each orbit, we demonstrate in Figure 3 that this find-ing continues to hold true for the present-day census of confirmed exoplanets. Equation 7 provides further intuition when considered in conjunction with planetary mass-radius relationships, as visualized in Figure 4. For sub-Jovian-mass planets, the scaling of Rp with Mp is sub-linear, at roughly Rp ∝

M 1/3 

> p

for Mp ≲ 2M⊕ and Rp ∝ M 2/3 

> p

for 2 M⊕ ≲ Mp ≲

0.4MJ (D. Valencia et al. 2006; J. Chen & D. Kipping 2017). In this regime, Mp grows more rapidly than Rp.For a given stellar type and assuming e = 0, this implies that Θ ∝ M 2/3 

> p

a for Mp ≲ 2M⊕ and Θ ∝ M 1/3 

> p

a for 2M⊕ ≲ Mp ≲ 0.4MJ . Hence, higher-mass rocky and Neptunian planets have higher Safronov numbers, such that more massive planets are generally more efficient at ejecting material for a given orbit and host star type. For Jovian-mass planets ( M ≳ 0.4MJ ), the mass-radius relationship is relatively flat at Rp ∝ M 0 

> p

≈

constant (J. Chen & D. Kipping 2017). In this regime, given a known stellar type (and thus mass M∗), the Safronov number further simplifies so that it scales only with orbital separation r—or, for circular orbits, with semimajor axis a. The Safronov number for an e = 0 Jovian-mass planet is then well-approximated by a lin-ear scaling with semimajor axis, Θ ∝ a.The Safronov number is not necessarily static for a given planet. A planet may migrate during or after its formation, either increasing or decreasing the Safronov number depending on the direction of migration. As gi-ant planets cool and contract, altering their densities by a factor of a few, their Safronov numbers also accord-ingly shift, as explored by A. S. Bonomo et al. (2017) in the context of the CoRoT-9 b Jovian planet. This affects the branching ratios of accretion vs. ejection outcomes for close encounters. The Safronov number also has important implica-tions for the formation of planets. The concept of the Safronov number was originally developed in the context 6  

> Figure 4. Theoretical, piecewise mass-radius scalings across planetary mass regimes, alongside associated scalings of the Safronov number. The census of observed exoplanets with masses and radii (including uncertainties) reported in the NASA Exoplanet Archive PSCompPars table as of 7/1/2026 is shown in gray, and the theoretical fits with fixed exponents are scaled to match this population. We note that the empirically-derived exponents fitted to each subpopulation in previous work have been observed to deviate slightly from these theoretical values, which enables improved matches at the boundaries between each subpopulation (e.g. J. Chen & D. Kipping 2017).

of gravitational focusing (see Section 4.2 for further dis-cussion of this mechanism), as a limit for planetesimal accretion to proceed (V. S. Safronov & E. V. Zvjagina 1969). Thus, the fact that planets exist in our solar sys-tem with Θ > 1 implies that they must have either mi-grated or formed through a separate mechanism (in the case of the solar system giant planets, primarily gas ac-cretion). This also implies a limit for planet formation: that is, the Safronov number may be used to approxi-mate the widest orbital separation at which a planet of a given mass and radius, around a given host star, may form through planetesimal accretion such that Θ < 1(accretion dominates over ejection). For an Earth-like planet around a solar-mass star, this limit is 14.2 AU. 2.1.2. Angular momentum deficit 

The angular momentum deficit (AMD) is defined as the difference in angular momentum between a plane-tary system and the same system in which all planets are on circular, aligned orbits at the same semimajor axes. The AMD may be calculated as (P.-S. Laplace 1878; J. Laskar 1997, 2000) AMD = 

> N

X

> k=1

Mp,k 

pGM ∗ak(1 −

q

1 − e2 

> k

cos ik) (10) where Mp,k , ak, ek, and ik are the mass, semimajor axis, eccentricity, and inclination of the kth planet, and the sum is taken over N bound planets in the system. In this expression, the inclinations are taken relative to the invariable plane of the planetary system (P.-S. Laplace 1878), which is defined as the plane perpendicular to the net angular momentum vector of the system. For sufficiently high AMD, secular evolution can be chaotic and the planets’ orbital eccentricities and incli-nations may diffusively evolve toward equipartition of the secular degrees of freedom, in some cases resulting in chaotic evolution and orbit crossings (Y. Lithwick & Y. Wu 2011; Y. Wu & Y. Lithwick 2011; Y. Lithwick & Y. Wu 2014). J. Laskar & A. C. Petit (2017) presents an analytic limit for the critical AMD required for sta-bility in compact multi-planet systems, above which the system can undergo collisions and ejections commonly driven by overlapping mean-motion resonances (B. V. Chirikov 1979; A. C. Quillen 2011; A. C. Petit et al. 2020; D. Tamayo et al. 2021). The innermost planet is typically most susceptible to significant AMD transfer (Y. Wu & Y. Lithwick 2011), which raises its eccentric-ity and in some cases induces instabilities that remove the inner planet from the system. In this process, the eccentricities and inclinations of the outer planets are pushed toward lower values to conserve angular momen-tum, such that the loss of the innermost planet culmi-nates in a reduced system AMD. S. Hadden & Y. Wu (2025) applied numerical sim-ulations to demonstrate that detached planets reach 7their final state when there is no longer sufficient AMD to induce orbit crossings over time. Lower-mass plan-ets in crowded systems undergo instabilities over longer timescales than higher-mass planets (J. E. Chambers et al. 1996; F. C. Adams & G. Laughlin 2003; F. Marzari 2025). As a result, S. Hadden & Y. Wu (2025) found that while systems of scattered, detached equal-mass gi-ant planets ( ≳ 10 MNep ) often reach an AMD-stable con-figuration within 100 Myr after the first orbit-crossing, comparable systems of lower-mass Neptune analogues can take Gyr to reach this point. 2.2. Evidence for scattering-induced planetary ejection in the solar system 

Planet-planet scattering and subsequent planetary ejection have been invoked to explain many observables in planetary systems, including the solar system. Here we briefly discuss the evidence for planetary ejection in the solar system, which serves as a relatively well-constrained case study. Solar system models have long incorporated the in-fluence of planetesimal-driven migration, through which planetesimals are ejected from the system as the giant planets migrate (e.g. J. A. Fernandez & W.-H. Ip 1984; R. Malhotra 1993, 1995; E. W. Thommes et al. 1999; H. F. Levison et al. 2001; R. Gomes et al. 2005; K. Tsi-ganis et al. 2005; A. Morbidelli et al. 2005; K. Batygin & M. E. Brown 2010; H. F. Levison et al. 2011). Over time, these models have evolved to consider possible ad-ditional planets that may have existed in the outer solar system during its past. Several early works examined or alluded to the pos-sibility that the solar system may have once included additional planets that no longer remain bound. For ex-ample, numerical simulations by E. W. Thommes et al. (1999, 2002), which were focused on modeling the for-mation of Uranus and Neptune, included scenarios in which a fifth giant planet formed and was subsequently ejected from the outer solar system. P. Goldreich et al. (2004a), too, made the claim that some planet-sized ob-jects were likely ejected from the outer solar system at the late stages of planet formation. If the outer solar system planets formed in a packed oligarchy, then up to five Neptune-sized isolation masses could have fit be-tween 15-25 AU at mutual separations of 5 Hill radii—a configuration that would have destabilized as the natal disk dispersed, often resulting in the ejection of one or more planets (E. B. Ford & E. I. Chiang 2007). D. Nesvorn´ y (2011) and K. Batygin et al. (2012) each demonstrated that numerical simulations invoking a fifth solar system giant planet—which is often ejected 5

during the solar system’s instability-driven evolution— provide an excellent match to solar system observables, such as the solar system’s secular modes. Follow-up work by D. Nesvorn´ y & A. Morbidelli (2012) examined a range of possible resonant orbital configurations and showed that the inclusion of a fifth (and possibly sixth) planet in the numerical simulations enables models to much more consistently match a, e, and i of the solar system planets to present-day values. Further numerical studies adopting this five-giant-planet+orbital instability model have demonstrated that it appropriately reproduces the capture of the Tro-jan asteroids (D. Nesvorn´ y et al. 2013) and irregular satellites (D. Nesvorn´ y et al. 2014a) in the Jupiter sys-tem; that it is possible to maintain the Galilean moon system around Jupiter despite close-approach encoun-ters between Jupiter and the extra ice giant (R. Dei-enno et al. 2014; R. Cloutier et al. 2015); and that it may enable inclination excitation for Iapetus relative to Saturn’s orbital plane (D. Nesvorn´ y et al. 2014b), but that ejection of the fifth giant by Jupiter (rather than Saturn) is favored to avoid disrupting Iapetus’s orbit (R. Cloutier et al. 2015). A fifth giant planet may also sup-port the secular-resonance-driven dispersal of primor-dial asteroid families (P. I. O. Brasil et al. 2016), and it is consistent with the predicted orbital evolution of Neptune necessary to reproduce the observed structure of the Kuiper belt (D. Nesvorn´ y 2015a,b; R. Deienno et al. 2017). Studies examining other aspects of the solar system’s primordial configuration now often incor-porate this fifth ice giant (e.g. M. S. Clement et al. 2018, 2021a,b; B. Liu et al. 2022; N. A. Kaib et al. 2024; S. N. Raymond & N. A. Kaib 2026). Whether or not a fifth ice giant was ejected in the early solar system’s history, it would be surprising if lower-mass planets were not. Collisions between plane-tary embryos have been modeled to build the cores of the solar system giant planets, and in this process a sub-set of the embryos (typically ranging from ≈ 1−6 M⊕) is commonly ejected and removed from the system (e.g. M. Jakub´ ık et al. 2012; A. Izidoro et al. 2015). Additional planetary embryos may also be ejected at other points in the solar system’s evolution—for example, in simula-tions presented within M. S. Clement et al. (2018), mul- 

> 5In a small fraction of runs reported by K. Batygin et al. (2012), an ice giant instead merged with Saturn, similarly reproduc-ing a configuration comparable to that of the solar system. Thus, the five-giant-planet solar system model does not require that planetary ejection is invoked to reproduce present-day out-comes.

8tiple embryos from 0 .25 − 2.5 MMars were removed from the inner solar system during the giant planet instability. If planetary embryos remained in the outer solar system at later times, after gas giant formation and disk disper-sal, most would have been similarly ejected (T. Barclay et al. 2017; K. Silsbee & S. Tremaine 2018). Though the true primordial occurrence and size distribution of such lower-mass ejected planets in the solar system’s early history remains relatively poorly constrained, the perva-siveness of planetary ejection in a bottom-up planet for-mation framework strongly suggests that it has played a role in the solar system’s early evolution. 2.3. Evidence for scattering-induced planetary ejection in extrasolar systems 

Beyond the solar system, hints in the architectures of extrasolar systems also suggest a high rate of planet-planet scattering. Such evidence is typically drawn from the spacings and orbital properties of planetary systems, which often point toward dynamical sculpting beyond the planets’ initial formation. Perhaps the most direct line of evidence for a high rate of planetary ejection in extrasolar systems is the eccentricity distribution observed for giant exoplanets. Planet-planet scattering has long been invoked to ex-plain the elevated eccentricities of exoplanet orbits, of-ten in the context of hot Jupiter formation and high-eccentricity giant exoplanet orbital configurations (F. A. Rasio & E. B. Ford 1996; S. J. Weidenschilling & F. Marzari 1996; D. N. C. Lin & S. Ida 1997; F. C. Adams & G. Laughlin 2003; S. Chatterjee et al. 2008; M. Na-gasawa et al. 2008; S. N. Raymond et al. 2009). Even extremely high eccentricities e > 0.99 may be reached by planet-planet scattering (D. Carrera et al. 2019). Population-level studies have found that the high ec-centricities of giant exoplanet systems are well-matched by models in which nearly all ( > 75 − 80%) systems un-derwent an orbital instability (M. Juri´ c & S. Tremaine 2008; S. N. Raymond et al. 2010; S. N. Raymond et al. 2011). Planets with a higher Safronov number also show a wider spread in orbital eccentricities (E. B. Ford & F. A. Rasio 2008, see also Figure 3 in this review), suggesting that at least a subset of these planets may have been dynamically excited to higher eccentricities through past scattering events. Planet-planet scattering notably offers a pathway toward elevated eccentricities while simultaneously reproducing observed features of the spin-orbit distribution for giant exoplanet systems (M. Rice et al. 2022; J. Rusznak et al. 2025; J. Esposito et al. 2026; J. Dong et al. 2026). Another line of evidence used to argue for a high rate of orbital instabilities in exoplanet systems is the relative spacings of observed planets. The dynamical separation of planets may be measured with the critical spacing ∆, given as ∆ ≡ a2 − a1

RH

(11) for semimajor axes a1 and a2, and Hill radius 

RH = a1 + a2

2

 m1 + m2

3M∗

1/3

(12) with planet masses m1 and m2. B. Gladman (1993) showed that systems of two planets on circular, copla-nar orbits are stable to orbit-crossing instabilities for ∆ > 2√3 ≈ 3.46. For higher-multiplicity systems, this spacing must be larger to ensure stability, with specific configurations (planet multiplicities and mass ratios) ex-amined in further detail in a slew of later studies (J. E. Chambers et al. 1996; J.-L. Zhou et al. 2007; A. W. Smith & J. J. Lissauer 2009; B. Funk et al. 2010; B. Pu & Y. Wu 2015; D. Tamayo et al. 2015; S. J. Morrison & K. M. Kratter 2016; A. Obertas et al. 2017; D. R. Rice et al. 2018; A. Yalinewich & C. Petrovich 2020; P. Bartram et al. 2021; J. J. Lissauer & S. Gavino 2021; D. R. Rice & J. H. Steffen 2023; K. Volk & R. Malhotra 2024; D.-H. Wu et al. 2025; B. Outland et al. 2026; S. Gavino & J. J. Lissauer 2026). Early work by R. Barnes & T. Quinn (2004), exam-ining the 13 multiplanet systems known at the time, demonstrated that, while the known systems were sta-ble, many fell precariously close to the edge of orbital instability. This led to the “packed planetary systems” hypothesis (R. Barnes & S. N. Raymond 2004), which suggests that all multiplanet systems are tightly packed, and those that appear to have larger spacings instead host planets below the detection limit within the ob-served gaps. This tight dynamical packing was later found to extend to many planetary systems that lack nearby gas giant planets (C. Lovis et al. 2011), including at least ≈ 30% of multiplanet systems detected through the Kepler space mission (W. J. Borucki et al. 2010), pointed out by J. Fang & J.-L. Margot (2013). Building upon these findings, B. Pu & Y. Wu (2015) showed that Kepler planets’ spacings lie just beyond the stability threshold for survival over Gyr timescales, at ∆ ≈ 12, leading the authors to propose that most short-period planetary systems originated in dynami-cally packed configurations that subsequently underwent instabilities. The instabilities in these systems would result in collisions due to the short-period orbits of Ke-pler systems, such that they would not directly pro-duce ejections. However, this finding does point toward a high incidence of dynamical sculpting within plane-9tary systems—where analogous processes at wider orbits would result in ejections rather than collisions. The paucity of mean-motion resonances (that is, or-bital commensurabilities—formally, planet pairs with at least one librating resonant angle) in exoplanet systems, too, has been called upon as evidence for a high rate of orbital instabilities. J. J. Lissauer et al. (2011) found that Kepler planetary systems reported from the first four months of the mission (W. J. Borucki et al. 2011) show little to no statistical preference toward mean-motion resonance, with most systems lying wide of dom-inant resonances by up to a few percent. This result was further affirmed by D. C. Fabrycky et al. (2014) using a larger set of planet candidate from 16 months of Kepler 

data (N. M. Batalha et al. 2013). The low occurrence of mean-motion resonances in ex-oplanet systems is unexpected as a direct consequence of formation. Commensurabilities are predicted to be common in planetary systems: the Jovian and Satur-nian moon systems show an overabundance of mean-motion resonances (A. E. Roy & M. W. Ovenden 1954), and resonances play a key role in shaping the solar sys-tem’s structure (S. J. Peale 1976; R. Malhotra 1998). Planetary migration models oriented toward exoplanet systems predict that planets should typically be found at or near commensurability after migration within the protoplanetary disk (M. H. Lee & S. J. Peale 2002; P. Cresswell & R. P. Nelson 2006; C. Terquem & J. C. Pa-paloizou 2007; S. N. Raymond et al. 2008; M. Ogihara & S. Ida 2009). The low rate of present-day mean-motion resonances in the census of mature planetary systems implies a high rate of orbital instabilities during or soon after proto-planetary gas disk dispersal (e.g. M. Ogihara & S. Ida 2009; A. Izidoro et al. 2017; B. Liu et al. 2022; A. Izidoro et al. 2021)—or, as required to reproduce the suggestive high rate of mean-motion resonances in young ( ≈ 10 −60 Myr) planetary systems (F. Dai et al. 2024), at delayed stages post-disk-dispersal. Suggested mechanisms for later-stage resonant chain disruption include delayed in-stability caused by remnant planetesimal disks in the systems (P. Griveaud et al. 2024; R. LoRusso et al. 2026; N. Choksi et al. 2026). While the low rate of commensu-rabilities in Kepler systems is specific to transiting plan-ets, which lie in a parameter space in which instabilities would generally result in collisions rather than ejections, they may be indicative of system-wide disruption corre-sponding to planetary ejection in the outer system (e.g. P. Goldreich et al. 2004b). Case studies of individual exoplanet systems have pro-vided evidence that planet-planet scattering and conse-quent ejection may have occurred in the systems’ his-tories, as well. E. B. Ford et al. (2005), for example, demonstrate that the excited orbital eccentricities in the 3-planet Upsilon Andromedae system may be naturally reproduced by a brief, ≈ 1000-year period of past insta-bility and the ejection of a fourth planet. A. S. Bonomo et al. (2017) carried out a case study of the CoRoT-9 planetary system, which contains a single eccentric warm Jupiter planet on a ≈95-day orbit, to show that the previous ejection of a second, ≈ 50 M⊕ planet well reproduces the system architecture. L. Yuan & M. H. Lee (2024) and T. Lu et al. (2026) present case stud-ies for the 2-planet GJ 1148 and 14 Herculis systems, respectively, showing that if the high eccentricities of the systems result from planet-planet scattering, then a third planet was most likely ejected from the systems. 2.4. Predictions and implications: planet-planet scattering 

2.4.1. The present-day population of bound planets 

Ejected FFPs typically leave behind equal- or higher-mass planets that remain bound to the system. As a result, limits may be placed on the production of FFPs through ejection vs. in situ formation by examining the occurrence of high-mass bound exoplanets that show possible signatures of past instabilities. The orbital configurations of giant exoplanet orbits suggest that instabilities are common, with an insta-bility occurrence rate ≳ 75 − 80% that well reproduces the eccentricity distribution of Jupiter-mass planets (M. Juri´ c & S. Tremaine 2008; S. N. Raymond et al. 2010; S. N. Raymond et al. 2011). In the limit that all FFPs are ejected from their natal systems through planet-planet scattering with giant-planet neighbors, the num-ber of FFPs per star Nfree /N stars may be calculated as 

Nfree 

Nstars 

= fgiant funstable nejec , (13) where fgiant is the fraction of stars hosting giant plan-ets (in particular, those with Θ ≫ 1), funstable is the fraction of those systems that undergo instabilities, and 

nejec is the typical number of planets ejected from each system that undergoes an instability (D. Veras & S. N. Raymond 2012; N. Miret-Roig et al. 2022). The occurrence of wide-orbiting Jovian-mass planets is now relatively well-constrained in FGK star systems through a combination of microlensing (D. Suzuki et al. 2016), direct imaging (B. P. Bowler 2016; F. Baron et al. 2019; E. L. Nielsen et al. 2019), and radial velocity sur-veys (A. Cumming et al. 2008; M. Mayor et al. 2011; R. B. Fernandes et al. 2019; R. A. Wittenmyer et al. 2020; B. J. Fulton et al. 2021, see also C. Clanton & B. S. Gaudi (2016) for a synthesis of these methods). N. 10 Miret-Roig et al. (2022) demonstrated that in principle (that is, from an ejection rate standpoint), up to 100% of the highest-mass free-floating planets may be accounted for through single-star dynamical instabilities and sub-sequent ejection. Notably, this work focused primarily on high-mass young “planets” in star-forming regions, with formation pathways that remain under debate. We repeat this exercise here, adopting the microlensing-constrained FFP mass function from T. Sumi et al. (2023) 

dN d log 10 M = 2 .18 

 M

8 M⊕

−0.96 

dex −1 star −1, (14) which corresponds to 0.09 free-floating giant planets per star between 0.3 and 13 MJ . If all free-floating gi-ant planets were produced via ejection by planet-planet scattering, then roughly one giant planet ( M > 0.3MJ )would need to be ejected per instability for a giant-planet occurrence rate ≈ 10 − 15% (C. Clanton & B. S. Gaudi 2014) and instability rate 75-80%. The adopted giant-planet occurrence rate for this estimate is specific to M dwarf systems from C. Clanton & B. S. Gaudi (2014), in accordance with typical representatives of the galactic stellar population. Jupiter-mass planets may not, however, be the sole (or even dominant) ejectors of their neighbors. Wide-orbiting Neptune-mass planets, too, may play a leading role. Observational limits from microlensing surveys (D. Suzuki et al. 2016; R. Poleski et al. 2021), alongside in-direct evidence from axisymmetric protoplanetary disk substructures at tens of AU host-star separations (S. M. Andrews et al. 2018; S. Zhang et al. 2018), indicate that these wide-orbiting Neptunes are common. Recent stud-ies have demonstrated that wide-orbiting Neptunes may be the dominant ejectors in many systems, resulting in the removal of equal- or lower-mass neighboring plan-ets (S. Hadden & Y. Wu 2025; K. Guo et al. 2025; R. LoRusso et al. 2026). 2.4.2. The mass distribution of FFPs 

The initial conditions of planetary systems—in par-ticular, their typical spacings, orbit distributions, and masses—play a key role in setting the expected outcomes of planet-planet scattering. We describe population-level simulated trends for the outcomes of planet-planet scattering in this section, noting that specific predic-tions are strongly dependent upon the assumed initial conditions of the systems. In systems with unequal-mass planets, lower-mass planets tend to be most efficiently ejected through scattering—generally pushing the mass function of ejected planets to be more bottom-heavy. However, competing effects complicate the interpretation of the mass function. In equal-mass multiplanet systems, lower-mass ensem-bles and those with larger mutual separations typically take longer to eject planets (e.g. J. E. Chambers et al. 1996; F. Marzari & S. J. Weidenschilling 2002; P. Faber & A. C. Quillen 2007; S. Chatterjee et al. 2008; A. C. Petit et al. 2020), with a timescale dependence on the planet mass and the innermost planet’s orbital period (S. Hadden & Y. Wu 2025; R. Zhai et al. 2025). For equal-mass, two-planet Hill stable planetary systems with e ≲ 0.3, D. Veras & A. J. Mustill (2013) found a representative instability timescale log 10 Norb ≈ 5.2

 μMJ /M ⊙

−0.18 

(15) given a mass ratio μ between each planet and the host star, corresponding to a number of inner planet orbits 

Norb . For a suite of simulations with five equal-mass planets and constant fractional spacing between planets, S. Hadden & Y. Wu (2025) similarly found an empirical relation 

Tej (Mp) ≈ 2.9 × 10 7 Mp

MNep 

−1.64 

P1,0 (16) for the time taken for the number of bound planets to de-crease by one, with initial orbital period P1,0 and where 

MNep corresponds to one Neptune mass. Thus, lower-mass crowded systems take longer to undergo instabili-ties than higher-mass crowded systems. Because of this difference in instability timescale with planet mass, populations produced from early- vs. late-time instabilities may have differing properties. A natu-ral time for the first wave of instabilities and ejections is early in a system’s lifetime, as the mass distribution sub-stantially shifts around the era of planet formation and disk dispersal. These instabilities would generally occur within the first few Myr of a system’s lifetime (R. R. de Sousa et al. 2020), with possible delays in the instability timescale to within the first few hundred Myr based on the observed longevity of resonant chains in inner plane-tary systems (F. Dai et al. 2024; P. Griveaud et al. 2024; R. LoRusso et al. 2026; N. Choksi et al. 2026). The first wave of instabilities should be bottom-heavy in its mass distribution, as the least massive planets would be ejected first. K. Guo et al. (2025) (see also S. Ma et al. (2016)) leveraged population-synthesis mod-els from S. Ida et al. (2018) to forward-model the pro-duction of FFPs from planet-planet scattering in single-star systems within the core accretion paradigm. The authors found that most planets are ejected during in-11 stabilities induced during these earlier stages, with a predicted mass distribution of FFPs that is highest (and roughly flat) around 0.1-10 M⊕. Notably, higher-mass self-gravitating “fragments” of material—in some cases planet-mass—may be more readily ejected through early instabilities in the gravitational instability forma-tion framework (J. C. Papaloizou et al. 2001; D. For-gan et al. 2015; D. H. Forgan et al. 2018; O. Schib et al. 2025a,b), with distinct implications from the core-accretion paradigm generally discussed within this sec-tion. Over the remainder of the system’s lifetime on the main sequence, additional instabilities may be triggered as well. These slower-acting instability mechanisms, in-duced by secular drift and AMD transfer, would most efficiently remove higher -mass planets, as discussed in S. Hadden & Y. Wu (2025). Specifically, high-mass plan-ets in multi-giant-planet systems would be the first to be ejected through these mechanisms, whereas lower-mass sets of planets would be much longer-lived if they survived the initial phase of early instabilities. Planets are not the only bodies that may become unbound through the process of scattering described throughout this section. Planet-planet scattering may also produce a large population of free-floating moons, though some FFPs with sufficiently short-period moons may retain their satellites even after ejection (J. H. Debes & S. Sigurdsson 2007; Y.-X. Gong et al. 2013; Y.-C. Hong et al. 2018; I. Rabago & J. H. Steffen 2019; X. Huang & D. Lai 2026). Tidally-induced migration in star-planet-moon systems (J. A. Alvarado-Montes et al. 2017), too, has the potential to trigger scattering events that destabilize and eject moons, with the efficiency of this process dictated by the system geometry and the host planet’s tidal quality factor and Love number (A. Tokadjian & A. L. Piro 2020; M. Sucerquia et al. 2020; V. Dobos et al. 2021; E. Bolmont et al. 2025). Furthermore, planet-planet scattering among wide-orbiting giant planets has been shown to efficiently eject planetary embryos (e.g. J. E. Chambers 2001; D. Ve-ras & P. J. Armitage 2005; S. N. Raymond et al. 2005; T. Barclay et al. 2017), as well as planetesimals (e.g. S. N. Raymond et al. 2010; S. N. Raymond et al. 2011, 2012; F. Marzari 2014; S. N. Raymond et al. 2018; M. Rice & G. Laughlin 2019) that may contribute toward the high number density of free-floating interstellar ob-jects inferred from recent detections (A. Do et al. 2018). These bodies would be ejected at a range of overlap-ping timescales: for example, planetary embryos would generally be ejected early in a system’s lifetime, but they may heavily overlap in their mass distribution with moons that are commonly ejected alongside giant plan-ets. 2.4.3. The velocity distribution of FFPs 

Another observable that offers insight into the relative prevalence of FFP production mechanisms is the distri-bution of FFP excess velocities v∞. The excess velocity is defined as 

v∞ =

q

v2 − v2esc ,∗, (17) where v is the velocity of the ejected planet at the dis-tance where the body becomes unbound, and the escape velocity vesc ,∗ from the host star at that same position may be drawn from Equation 5. X. Huang & D. Lai (2026) derived a useful expression for the critical velocity vc, 2pl around which v∞ is peaked for two-body scattering, provided as 

vc, 2pl =

 Gm 1

0.12 a2

1/2 m1

m1 + m2

 a1

a2

1/4

(18) for two-planet systems with semimajor axes a1, a2 and planetary masses m1, m2. This expression was obtained by combining close-encounter-induced ejection rate es-timates from B. Pu & D. Lai (2021) and J. Li et al. (2022) with principles of energy exchange. A compa-rable expression was also obtained by X. Huang & D. Lai (2026) for the critical velocity vc, 3pl in the case of 3-body scattering, given as 

vc, 3pl =

 Gm max 

0.12 a3

1/2 mmax 

mmax + mejec 

 a1

a3

1/4

. (19) Here mmax is the highest-mass planet in the system, while meject is the mass of the ejected planet and a1, a3

are the semimajor axes of the innermost and outermost planet, respectively. In both expressions, the critical velocity corresponds to the peak of a probability distri-bution of velocities, which has a larger width for systems with more constituent bodies. Ejected planets from planet-planet scattering are pre-dicted to have relatively low excess velocities < 10 km/s, with a median at ≈ 2 − 3 km/s and lower excess ve-locities attained for planets ejected from larger initial semimajor axes (G. A. L. Coleman & W. DeRocco 2025; H. G. Bhaskar & H. B. Perets 2025; R. Zhai et al. 2025). Ejected planet-mass, self-gravitating fragments formed from gravitational instability, too, have comparably low expected excess velocities ≈ 4 − 5 km/s (D. H. Forgan et al. 2018). H. G. Bhaskar & H. B. Perets (2025) showed that planets are typically ejected within 30 ◦ of the plane of the planetary system, such that their trajectories, in 12 addition to their velocities, may encode some informa-tion about their birth environments.  

> 3.

INSTABILITIES IN SYSTEMS WITH BOUND STELLAR COMPANIONS Binary and multiple-star systems are ubiquitous across the galaxy: roughly half of sun-like stars host a bound stellar companion, with a higher occurrence of companions to higher-mass stars (A. Duquennoy & M. Mayor 1991; D. Raghavan et al. 2010; G. Duchˆ ene & A. Kraus 2013; S. S. R. Offner et al. 2023). Planets in multi-star systems are susceptible to many of the same dynamical instability mechanisms that induce planetary ejection in single-star systems, such as planet-planet scattering and intra-system resonance overlap. In ad-dition to these mechanisms, planets in binary systems may undergo further instabilities caused by perturba-tions from the companion star. Exoplanets in multiple-star systems may be di-vided into two classes: circumstellar (“ s−type,” his-torically standing for “satellite-type”) and circumbi-nary (“ p−type,” historically standing for “planet-type”) planets (R. Dvorak 1984). Circumstellar planets (top center panel of Figure 1) orbit a single star in a binary or higher-multiplicity stellar system, such that these sys-tems operate similarly to their single-star counterparts but with additional perturbations imposed by one or more additional, high-mass companions. Circumbinary planets (top right panel of Figure 1) instead orbit two stars 6 and therefore undergo qualitatively different evo-lutionary trajectories. The three-body problem, including the circular re-stricted three-body problem that may be applied to planetary systems in certain cases—circular orbits and large mass ratios between the planet and stars—has an extensive history in astronomy. There have been cor-respondingly many studies of three-body systems’ sta-bility, spanning both analytic (e.g. V. Szebehely 1977, 1980) and numerical (e.g. M. H´ enon & M. Guyot 1970; D. C. Black 1982; Y. J. Pendleton & D. C. Black 1983) results. Many of these foundational studies impose stringent criteria on the orbit and mass-ratio regimes for their analyses, limiting their applicability to true systems. Therefore, we focus here on relatively general forms  

> 6Note that we restrict this category to binary star systems, as over a dozen circumbinary planets have been found (e.g. L. R. Doyle et al. 2011; D. V. Martin et al. 2019; M. Thornton et al. 2026), whereas no planets have been confirmed encir-cling higher-multiplicity systems—though see J. L. Smallwood et al. (2021) for discussion of a tentative circumtriple planetary system in the GW Orionis system.

that account for orbital eccentricities and unequal stel-lar mass ratios, as are commonly observed in binary star systems (M. Moe & R. Di Stefano 2017; K. El-Badry et al. 2019; H.-C. Hwang et al. 2022). We emphasize that instability is a necessary but not sufficient condition for planetary ejection. Many binary systems undergo instabilities that do not necessarily in-duce planetary ejection. Instabilities may instead lead to collisions with other planets or with stars within the system, or they may, in rare cases, introduce exchange reactions in which the planet becomes bound to a differ-ent star. Thus, we begin with an overview of instabilities in the context of potential planetary ejection, then dis-cuss the implications of these instabilities for ejection rates. 3.1. Instabilities of circumstellar planets in binary systems 

Of the possible configurations for circumstellar planets in non-single-star systems, circumstellar binaries are the most well-studied to date. This is likely in part due to their relative simplicity, and in part because they are the most commonly observed configuration to date for non-single-star planetary systems. We divide instabilities in circumstellar binaries into two regimes: those most relevant for close binaries ( a ≲

a few hundred au) where the instability limit is set by intra-system dynamics (Section 3.1.1), and those most relevant for very wide binaries ( a ≳ a few hundred au) where the instability limit is instead set by the influence of passing stars and the galactic tide (Section 3.1.2). The instability limits described in the “close stellar bi-naries” overview may also play an important role in high-eccentricity wide binaries with close periastron ap-proaches. 3.1.1. Circumstellar planets in close stellar binaries 

For circumstellar planetary orbits in close binary sys-tems, there exists an outermost planetary semimajor axis for dynamical stability. Early derivations of this boundary were obtained through analytic approxima-tions by V. Szebehely (1980) in the context of the pla-nar, circular restricted three-body problem (enabling a wide range of binary mass ratios), as well as numerical calculations by G. Rabl & R. Dvorak (1988) for circular planetary orbits, equal-mass stars, and coplanar, eccen-tric planet-binary configurations. D. Benest (1988a,b, 1993) extended these frameworks to examine stability in the elliptic planar restricted three-body problem, in-cluding case studies of known binary systems. M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999) later con-ducted a large suite of numerical simulations in the ellip-tic restricted three-body problem—that is, with eccen-13       

> Figure 5. Example thresholds for s−type and p−type bi-nary instabilities for stellar binary mass ratio μb= 0 .3, dis-played as a function of the binary eccentricity and the ra-tio between the planet and binary semimajor axis. Bound-aries are drawn directly from M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999), provided in this work as Equations 20 and 21.

tric binary orbits and massless, test-particle planets— spanning 10 4 binary orbital periods and covering a range of binary separations and mass ratios. The commonly-adopted empirical formula for the outermost stable semi-major axis ac derived by M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999) is given as 

ac/a b =(0 .464 ± 0.006) + ( −0.380 ± 0.010) μb

+ ( −0.631 ± 0.034) e + (0 .586 ± 0.061) μbe

+ (0 .150 ± 0.041) e2 + ( −0.198 ± 0.074) μbe2

(20) where e is the binary eccentricity, ab is the binary semi-major axis, and μb is the binary mass ratio. This sta-bility limit is shown in blue in Figure 5 for a canonical binary mass ratio μb = 0 .3. Notably, all planets were assumed to lie on circular or-bits in M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999). E. Pilat-Lohinger et al. (2002) built upon this work to consider eccentric planet orbits using the Fast Lyapunov Indi-cator method (C. Froeschl´ e et al. 1997), which rapidly identifies chaotic, unstable orbits. With this method, the authors numerically examined the stability of cir-cumstellar planetary systems over 1000 binary orbital periods, demonstrating that planet eccentricity plays a minor role in setting stability relative to binary eccen-tricity. More recently, computational advances enabled an extensive new suite of ≈700 million N −body simu-lations that extended the expressions of M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999) to non-coplanar orbits across the range of planetary orbital eccentricities (B. Quarles et al. 2020), considering integration times of 10 5 yr per system. B. Quarles et al. (2020) provide a series of new coefficients to Equation 20 for varying binary eccentric-ity (Table 3 of B. Quarles et al. (2020)) and planetary inclination (Table 4 of B. Quarles et al. (2020)), with interpolation maps for intermediate values. Further studies have examined the stability of solar-system-like configurations in binary star systems, in-cluding a demonstration that a stellar companion sup-ports planetary ejection during instabilities in the Jump-ing Jupiter model (F. Marzari et al. 2005), as well as a characterization of the planetary removal timescale within the instability region for Earth-like planets (E.-M. David et al. 2003). 7 M. ´Avila-Bravo et al. (2026), too, carried out a suite of 2500 simulations following the 0.5-Gyr evolution of three giant planets on a cir-cumstellar orbit with a stellar binary companion at 

a = 50 − 1500 AU, mapping the rate of planetary sur-vivors as a function of binary properties. These contri-butions fold in the impact of neighboring planets and consider how planetary removal times scale with the pe-riastron distance of the companion star. L. R. Mudryk & Y. Wu (2006) applied semi-analytic models in the coplanar regime to provide use-ful intuition for the physical mechanisms underlying these numerically-characterized instability boundaries. Specifically, they showed that secular forcing is strong for planetary systems with nearby stellar companions, leading to significant overlap between subresonances of individual mean-motion resonances that triggers chaotic diffusion and planetary instability. L. R. Mudryk & Y. Wu (2006) demonstrated that, in practice, this leads to rapid ejection dominated by the influence of low-order resonances, with a jagged instability boundary as a function of eccentricity for a given mass ratio. This result remains in rough agreement with boundaries de-rived through orbital integrations, but demonstrates the more complex structure of the true stability boundary. Most of this section has focused on instabilities in sys-tems with fully-formed stars and fully-formed planets. However, in the presence of a growing stellar perturber, recent simulations have suggested that both Jovian-mass (A. ´Calovi´ c et al. 2026) and lower-mass (S. Nayakshin et al. 2026) planets formed through gravitational in-stability may be efficiently ejected through instabilities  

> 7Note that the definition of “ejection” in E.-M. David et al. (2003) encompasses both planets that become unbound from the host star and planets that collide with the host star; hence, to avoid confusion we use the term “planetary removal” in this context.

14 with the neighboring, growing stars. Such planets would be expected to have low excess velocities around 1-3 km/s. 3.1.2. Circumstellar planets in wide stellar binaries 

Over secular timescales, wide binaries may be per-turbed to high orbital eccentricities through gravita-tional interactions with passing stars and the galactic tide (Y.-F. Jiang & S. Tremaine 2010), triggering orbital instabilities and planetary ejection. N. A. Kaib et al. (2013) simulated this scenario for systems hosting four solar-system-like giant planets and a wide, bound stel-lar companion at 1,000-30,000 AU separations, showing that 30 − 60% of examined systems underwent at least one planetary ejection within 10 Gyr. J. A. Correa-Otto & R. A. Gil-Hutton (2017) extended this work to a broader set of wide binaries, excluding planets from their simulations but similarly finding that the widest (particularly a > 10 , 000 au) binaries and those with the highest orbital eccentricities ( e > 0.9) have a high binary disruption rate that would potentially lead to corresponding planetary disruption. Given the high rate of high-eccentricity wide binaries (H.-C. Hwang et al. 2022), this mechanism may serve as an important reservoir for FFPs. Indeed, E. Grishin et al. (2025) demonstrated that the ejection of giant planets from wide binary interactions with the galac-tic tide could account for 24 +117  

> −15

% of the population of free-floating Jovian-mass planets. This mechanism may contribute a significant subset of FFPs found at the high-mass end of the FFP mass function ( MJ ≳ afew MJ ), where planet-planet scattering—which tends to liberate the lowest-mass planets present in systems— may efficiently remove planets only in the case of multi-super-Jupiter systems. 3.2. Instabilities of circumbinary planets 

Well before the first circumbinary planetary sys-tem was discovered, numerical studies by R. Dvo-rak (1984) R. Dvorak (1986), and R. Dvorak et al. (1989) established that there exists a critical circumbi-nary separation—the innermost semimajor axis for stability—beyond which planetary orbits may remain stable. Using a large suite of numerical simulations, the location of this innermost semimajor axis ac was em-pirically quantified by M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999) as 

ac/a b =(1 .60 ± 0.04) + (5 .10 ± 0.05) e

+ ( −2.22 ± 0.11) e2 + (4 .12 ± 0.09) μb

+ ( −4.27 ± 0.17) eμ b + ( −5.09 ± 0.11) μ2

> b

+ (4 .61 ± 0.36) e2μ2

> b

(21) for systems of coplanar, circular orbits for binary semi-major axis ab, binary mass ratio μb, and binary eccen-tricity e. This stability boundary is visualized in red in Figure 5 for a binary with mass ratio μb = 0 .3. Later work that considered mutual inclinations be-tween orbits demonstrated that islands of stability exist at high mutual inclinations for binaries on eccentric or-bits. E. Pilat-Lohinger et al. (2003) applied numerical experiments to produce stability maps as a function of binary separation for planets that orbit equal-mass bi-naries at mutual orbital inclinations of up to i = 50 ◦.This was followed by an analytic characterization of sta-bility across binary orbital eccentricities and planetary inclinations, conducted by F. Farago & J. Laskar (2010) in the secular and quadrupolar approximations. Ad-ditional studies have demonstrated an island of stable libration toward polar orbits in circumbinary systems (S. Doolin & K. M. Blundell 2011; B. Quarles & J. J. Lissauer 2016; G. Li et al. 2016). While polar circumbi-nary planets have yet to be definitively detected, R. G. Martin et al. (2023) found that AC Herculis, which is a post-asymptotic giant branch star hosting a circumbi-nary disk, is consistent with this configuration. More recent advances have extended this previous work by examining substantially larger-scale suites of numerical simulations (B. Quarles et al. 2018; N. Geor-gakarakos et al. 2024) and additional methods, such as deep neural networks (C. Lam & D. Kipping 2018). These approaches were leveraged to more thoroughly de-lineate the parameter space for stability in circumbinary planetary systems, including islands of stability that are not well-captured by the polynomial form of Equation 21. 3.3. Planetary orbital instabilities in multi-star systems 

While most non-single-star stability studies to date have focused on binaries, planets may similarly undergo orbital instabilities in triple-star or higher-order sys-tems. There are many possible configurations of plane-tary orbits in such systems, including both s−type and 

p−type orientations. A few systematic studies have considered such sys-tems. P. E. Verrier & N. W. Evans (2007) characterized the stability zones for planets within low-inclination hi-erarchical triple-star systems, demonstrating that the empirical results from M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999) hold for triple-star systems with relatively low orbital eccentricities and sufficiently wide-orbiting, low-mass stars. F. Busetti et al. (2018) later applied 

N −body simulations to more extensively map plane-15 tary stability in triple-star systems, considering both prograde and retrograde planetary configurations. 3.4. Predictions and implications: instabilities in systems with bound stellar companions 

Orbital instabilities in binary and multi-star systems do not always lead to planetary ejection. Instead, they may result in planetary or stellar collisions, or in some cases capture into different orbits: for example, a planet in a circumbinary orbit may be captured into a circum-stellar orbit. Despite the extensive history of numerical simula-tion studies examining these systems, the distribution of these outcomes has not, to the authors’ knowledge, been explicitly reported for binary systems with circumstellar planets. Instead, the systems are typically grouped only as “stable” vs. “unstable”, without explicitly parsing the outcomes of the unstable systems. In circumbinary systems, by contrast, these outcomes have been explic-itly traced and reported for some simulation suites. R. A. Smullen et al. (2016) considered a range of planet populations and binary configurations to demon-strate that, for various initial condition parameteri-zations in the literature, instabilities in circumbinary star systems tend to lead to ejection within 10 Myr, with ejections occurring at a far higher rate (typically 

≈ 50 − 70%) than in single-star systems (typically ≈

25 − 50%). A. P. Sutherland & D. C. Fabrycky (2016) similarly conducted a numerical study of planets on tight (1-4 au) circular orbits in circumbinary systems with unequal stellar masses ( M2/M 1 = 0 .1) and binary semi-major axis 1 AU, finding that roughly 80% of unstable systems culminated in planetary ejection—with higher-eccentricity stellar binaries taking longer on average to eject planets. A small but nonzero percent of unsta-ble systems in this simulation suite (0 .16 ± 0.06%) had the unstable planet captured into orbit around the sec-ondary star. Intuition for the outcomes of instability in circumbi-nary systems may be gained through examining the cir-cular restricted three-body problem (see e.g. V. Szebe-hely & R. McKenzie 1981). For a three-body system setup with m1 > m 2 and m1, m 2 ≫ m3, as well as cir-cular orbits, the Jacobi constant CJ is conserved, given as 

CJ = 2 n(x ˙y − y ˙x) + 2 

 μ1

r1

+ μ2

r2



− ( ˙ x2 + ˙ y2 + ˙ z2) (22) for positions ( x, y, z ), velocities ( ˙ x, ˙y, ˙z), binary mean motion n, and parameterized masses μ1 = Gm 1 and 

μ2 = Gm 2. In this regime, zero-velocity curves may be calculated for a given CJ . R. A. Smullen et al. (2016) demonstrated that scattering is the only possible out-come for Jacobi constant CJ > 3.46; that is, collisions may not occur for CJ > 3.46. A wide swath of the instability region of circumbinary planets satisfies this condition, such that most systems that undergo insta-bilities in circumbinary systems are expected to undergo ejection, rather than collisions. Using a combined disk evolution and N −body model designed to simulate the outcomes of core-accretion planet formation, G. A. L. Coleman (2024) found that free-floating planets ejected from circumbinary interac-tions have relatively high excess velocities 8-12 km/s, with velocity dispersions that are substantially higher (≈ 3× larger) than those of free-floating planets ejected from planet-planet interactions. M. Teasdale & D. Sta-matellos (2026) simulated the process of disk fragmen-tation around circumbinary systems and found that orbital instabilities among the resulting population of planets—formed beyond 50 AU, and with a typical sep-aration of 100 AU—would produce free-floating planets with lower ejection velocities, potentially making them more difficult to distinguish from planets ejected from scattering in single-star systems. Some giant ( ≈ 10 MJ )planetary-mass objects have been found on such wide circumbinary orbits (J. L. Christiansen et al. 2025), though their prevalence at a demographic level is cur-rently not well-constrained. Follow-up population synthesis work by G. A. L. Cole-man & W. DeRocco (2025) showed that instabilities in circumbinary systems may account for most of the inferred census of ejected high-mass ( > 1M⊕) FFPs. G. A. L. Coleman & W. DeRocco (2025) offered quan-titative predictions for the number density of ejected planets derived from orbital instabilities in single and binary star systems as a function of planet mass. Their results suggest that planetary ejection across the galac-tic population of stars should produce a trough in the mass distribution at roughly 0 .8M⊕—between the rela-tively high rate of very low-mass planets and the pebble isolation mass peak near 8 M⊕, above which fewer plan-ets form and the number density of ejected planets turns back over. Last, the relevance of an unstable region for plane-tary ejection implicitly relies on the formation or migra-tion of planets into that region during the system life-time. Do planets form or arrive in unstable regions in the first place? If planet formation is ubiquitous across wide swaths of parameter space in planetary systems, in-cluding these unstable regions, then large populations of FFPs may be produced through such instabilities. Oth-erwise, the census of ejected planets from such binaries may be much lower. 16  

> 4.

FLYBY-INDUCED EJECTIONS Beyond intra-system dynamics, planets may also be dislodged from their primordial systems through dy-namical interactions with passing neighbors that are not bound to the host star. A planet may be ejected from its host system in the case that the energy injected from the flyby perturber (or from the cumulative gravitational assists from several perturbers) overcomes the gravita-tional potential energy binding the planet to its host star. An extensive set of literature exists both analytically and numerically constraining the outcomes of flyby in-teractions for a planetary system (e.g. D. C. Heggie 1975; J. G. Hills 1984; J. G. Hills & R. W. Dissly 1989; D. C. Heggie & F. A. Rasio 1996; F. C. Adams & G. Laughlin 2001; D. Malmberg et al. 2011; G. Li & F. C. Adams 2015; G. Brown & H. Rein 2022; N. A. Kaib & S. N. Raymond 2025). We do not attempt to pro-vide a comprehensive overview of all possible outcomes of these flybys here. Instead, we focus on the occurrence of such encounters and relevant implications for plane-tary ejections. A useful overview of the relevant analytic formulae for the change in eccentricity and binding en-ergy to two-body systems caused by flyby encounters is provided in Appendix A of R. Spurzem et al. (2009), which also draws upon prior results from D. C. Heggie (1975); D. C. Heggie & F. A. Rasio (1996); A. Roy & M. Haddow (2003); D. C. Heggie (2006). In this section, we provide an overview of the expected rates of planetary ejection through close encounters with other stars and planets in the galaxy. We consider spe-cific predictions for environments at a range of stellar densities. 4.1. Flyby occurrence rates 

In general, the occurrence rate of stellar flyby interac-tions Γ may be estimated as Γ = ⟨n∗⟩σ⟨v⟩, (23) where ⟨n∗⟩ is the local mean stellar density, σ is the cross-section of interaction, and ⟨v⟩ is the mean rela-tive velocity between stars. As shown by this expres-sion, planetary systems in dense stellar environments (high ⟨n∗⟩), hosting wide-orbiting planets (large σ), and embedded within stellar populations with high velocity dispersions (high ⟨v⟩) are most susceptible to disruption by stellar flybys and subsequent planetary ejection. We show a mapping of Γ as a function of stellar density and velocity dispersion in Figure 6 for two example planetary orbit cross-sections. 4.2. Cross-sections for flyby interactions 

At first glance, it may appear that the cross-section of interaction for a planetary system on a circular or-bit would correspond to πa 2 for a given semimajor axis 

a: the system’s geometric cross-section. This is not, however, generally the case due to the influence of grav-itational focusing. Gravitational focusing, which describes how the grav-itational influence between two bodies affects the effec-tive cross-section for interaction, gives 

σ = πa 2

1 + v2esc ,p

v2

> i



(24) as the cross-section for a star interacting with a planet with semimajor axis a. Here vi is the relative speed of encounter between the two systems, which for stellar fly-bys may be estimated as the velocity dispersion vdisp of the background stellar population, while vesc ,p is the es-cape velocity from the planet’s orbit. We note that this formalism applies specifically for close approaches to in-dividual planets’ orbits, whereas flybys at more distant close approaches may still significantly perturb the sys-tem. This formalism is conceptually very similar to that of the Safronov number Θ introduced in Section 2.1.1, which was originally derived through the framework of gravitational focusing to characterize the efficiency of planetesimal accretion (V. S. Safronov & E. V. Zvjagina 1969). Equation 5 shows that the escape velocity from the stellar system scales as vesc ,∗ ∝ 1/√r, which can be approximated as vesc ,∗ ∝ 1/√a for near-circular or-bits. Combining this escape velocity with Equation 24 reveals that the cross-section for flyby interactions scales with the planetary semimajor axis as σ ∝ a for (v2esc ,p/v 2 

> i

) ≫ 1. This criterion is satisfied in a wide range of environments, including open clusters, which typically have vdisp ≈ 1 km/s, as well as globular clus-ters, with a higher typical velocity dispersion vdisp ≈ 10 km/s (for comparison, vesc ,p = 60 km/s for Jupiter). G. Li & F. C. Adams (2015) verified this result through numerical simulations and demonstrated that the cross-section for disruption of a given planet’s orbit is nearly independent of that of neighboring planets in the sys-tem. Field stars in the local solar neighborhood have typical relative velocities vdisp ≈ 30 − 40 km/s (B. Nordstr¨ om et al. 2004) such that the approximation ( v2esc ,p/v 2 

> i

) ≫ 1breaks down particularly for lower-mass planets (for example, vesc ,p = 23 .5 km/s for Neptune). In envi-ronments with very high velocity dispersions, such as the Milky Way bulge ( vdisp ≈ 120 km/s) and core (vdisp ≈ 170 km/s), gravitational focusing plays a less 17              

> Figure 6. Flyby rates Γ as a function of stellar density and velocity dispersion. Representative values for example stellar environments are shown alongside a reference line tracing the threshold for one flyby encounter per Gyr. Here we adopt the cross-section for flyby interactions σ≈a, which holds for v2esc ,p/v 2
> i≫1. We visualize two cases, for a planetary orbit with a= 1 AU and another with a= 30 AU. Wide-orbiting planets are much more susceptible to disruption by flybys than shorter-period planets due to their larger cross-sections for interaction.

dominant role and the geometric cross-section πa 2 is a more appropriate choice. 4.3. Potential outcomes from stellar flyby interactions 

Depending on the timing of a flyby in the planetary system’s evolution, as well as the relative masses and geometries of the flyby and planetary system, stellar flybys may result in several possible destabilizing out-comes. The implications of stellar flybys for planetary ejection have been examined in a range of contexts, in-cluding the solar system (G. Laughlin & F. C. Adams 2000; J. K. Zink et al. 2020; G. Brown & H. Rein 2022; S. N. Raymond et al. 2024; N. A. Kaib & S. N. Raymond 2025) and extrasolar systems (e.g. G. Laughlin & F. C. Adams 1998; D. Malmberg et al. 2011; G. Li & F. C. Adams 2015; F. Yu & D. Lai 2024). Frequent stellar fly-bys in dense environments have observable implications for lower-mass bodies, as well, producing a significant population of ejected planetesimals that become inter-stellar objects (T. O. Hands et al. 2019; S. Pfalzner et al. 2021). In stellar clusters, binary star systems may become unbound through either individual nearby encounters or through a more gradual process of “evaporation”, in which bound objects are driven above the cluster’s es-cape velocity by distant, weak encounters. Transpos-ing these mechanisms to the planetary regime, C. de la Fuente Marcos & R. de la Fuente Marcos (1999) showed that the evaporative process of ejection, while preva-lent in binary star systems, is negligible for planets in single-star systems. Instead, using a series of N -body simulations, they found that planetary ejection in star clusters may occur through multi-star interactions that temporarily produce hierarchical triple or quadruple sys-tems. This has the potential to launch newly unbound planets to velocities typically < 25 km/s, with a small tail toward much higher values (up to 120 km/s in the examined simulations). Close stellar flybys ( ≲ 100 au) may induce the im-mediate ejection of neighboring planets or destabilize a system, leading to rapid ejection soon after the flyby event (J. G. Hills 1984). In some cases, close flybys with low-mass stars or brown dwarfs may lead to an ex-change interaction in which the planet becomes bound to the intruder (D. Malmberg et al. 2011). More distant stellar flybys tend to excite the orbital eccentricities and inclinations of planets that are left bound, with the most pronounced effect on the widest-orbiting planets in a system (D. Malmberg et al. 2011; M. X. Cai et al. 2018; D. Li et al. 2019; E. A. Ellithorpe & N. A. Kaib 2022; H. Rickman et al. 2023). Eccentric-ity and inclination disturbances for wide-orbiting plan-ets propagate inward through the system through sec-ular planet-planet interactions (N. L. Zakamska & S. Tremaine 2004), altering the orbits of closer-in plan-ets. This reduces the timescale of orbital instabilities and planet-planet scattering, indirectly triggering plan-etary ejection over Myr to Gyr timescales (e.g. A. C. Boley et al. 2012). Orbital excitation that occurs while the protoplanetary disk is still present may, however, be efficiently erased due to planet-disk interactions (F. Marzari & G. Picogna 2013; G. Picogna & F. Marzari 2014). As a result, the long-term impact of dynamical 18 excitation from stellar flybys is most pronounced post-disk-dispersal. In rare cases with favorable orientations, a passing star with a close, edge-on encounter may induce the simulta-neous ejection of two giant planets, producing Jupiter-mass binary objects (Y. Wang et al. 2024). While such encounters are likely not common in the local so-lar neighborhood due to the low rate of close stellar encounters, the occurrence of such events may reach up to a few percent for initially wide-orbiting plane-tary systems residing in dense stellar clusters. Empir-ical upper limits on the occurrence of this mechanism may be placed by imaging surveys sensitive to binary planetary-mass objects (e.g. H. Bouy et al. 2026). Im-portantly, however, many such objects may have been formed in situ —through direct collapse—rather than through flyby-induced ejection (see Section 6.1 for fur-ther discussion). 4.4. Substellar object flybys 

Close flyby encounters with substellar objects (that is, free-floating brown dwarfs and planets) may also lead to the disruption of planetary orbits, as well as subse-quent planetary ejection. Direct disruptions occur at a rate that can be calculated using an equivalent for-malism to that presented in Equation 23, but with the local mean stellar density and relative velocity replaced with the relevant values for free-floating substellar ob-jects, rather than stars. In the presence of an underlying population of FFPs, close encounters between FFPs and bound planetary systems may dislodge additional plan-ets or induce orbital instabilities, further growing the FFP population. G. Brown et al. (2025) examined this scenario in the context of the solar system’s mutual inclination and ec-centricity excitation, finding from a suite of numerical simulations that close substellar object flybys often re-sult in planetary ejection and could contribute 10 7 − 10 8

free-floating planets ejected from the roughly 10 10 sun-like star systems in the galaxy, assuming solar-system-like architectures. S. N. Raymond & N. A. Kaib (2026) considered a similar range of parameters to demonstrate that the flyby of a substellar object could have triggered a dynamical instability among the giant planets in the early solar system, finding a ≈ 1 − 5% chance of this scenario depending on the adopted occurrence rate of free-floating planets. The production of FFPs serves as a feedback loop that may enable the further production of FFPs. However, current projected rates of planetary ejection caused by substellar object flybys are relatively low: with only 1% of sun-like stars having planets directly ejected through substellar object flybys, direct ejection through this mechanism likely does not play a major role in the to-tal rate of FFP production. An enhanced instability rate from substellar object flybys offers an indirect av-enue to increase the rate of planetary ejection through substellar object flybys, which may ultimately induce planet-planet instabilities. This rate, too, is limited by the occurrence of free-floating planets required for such encounters. 4.5. Predictions and implications: flyby encounters 

The projected contribution of flyby encounters in pro-ducing FFPs varies significantly with stellar environ-ment. The stellar density and velocity dispersion, each of which varies dramatically across the birth cycle and environment of a star, play an important role in setting the occurrence of stellar flybys, as can be seen through examination of Equation 23. Therefore, we consider predictions for planetary ejection specifically in stellar cluster environments due to their relatively high stellar densities, focusing on embedded clusters (Section 4.5.1), evolved open clusters (Section 4.5.2), and globular clus-ter environments (Section 4.5.3). 4.5.1. Predictions and implications: flybys in embedded clusters 

Stars are generally born in embedded clusters within molecular clouds, which are relatively high-density envi-ronments (typically 10 2 − 10 3 stars pc −3; C. J. Lada & E. A. Lada 2003). As a result, young stars experience a relatively high rate of stellar encounters that may trigger planetary ejection. In embedded cluster environments, protoplanetary disks may be truncated, warped, or destroyed by flyby encounters (C. J. Clarke & J. E. Pringle 1993; A. Scally & C. Clarke 2001; F. C. Adams et al. 2006; M. M. Frag-ner & R. P. Nelson 2009; D. Forgan & K. Rice 2009; J. Craig & M. R. Krumholz 2013; G. P. Rosotti et al. 2014; X. Zheng et al. 2015; N. Cuello et al. 2020, 2023) and photoevaporation caused by Far Ultraviolet (FUV) and Extreme Ultraviolet (EUV) flux from nearby, high-mass stars (H. St¨ orzer & D. Hollenbach 1999; P. J. Ar-mitage 2000; A. Scally & C. Clarke 2001; F. C. Adams et al. 2004; A. J. Winter et al. 2018; R. J. Parker et al. 2021; A. J. Winter & T. J. Haworth 2022), po-tentially suppressing the planet formation process. F. C. Adams et al. (2006) and E.-M. Proszkow & F. C. Adams (2009) each found that these external effects should not prevent the formation of solar-system-like architec-tures in typical embedded clusters, though Jovian-mass planet formation may be suppressed in environments with the highest stellar densities ( ρ ≳ 10 4M⊙ pc −3;E. C. Daffern-Powell & R. J. Parker 2022). 19 For environments in which giant planets are born, those residing in multiplanet systems and on the widest orbits are most susceptible to ejection. G. Laughlin & F. C. Adams (1998) found that Jupiter analogs com-monly have their orbits disrupted by flyby interactions with binary star companions in their natal clusters, with roughly 5% of such planets ejected over the course of 100 Myr. For solar-system-like architectures, with four gas giants, planetary ejection in embedded clusters occurs at a higher rate over the same timescale (5-15%; D. Malm-berg et al. 2007) due to the combined influence of direct ejection and orbital-instability-inducing eccentricity ex-citation within multiplanet systems (see also W. Hao et al. 2013). Wider-orbiting giant planets at 10-100 AU may be ejected at much higher rates of up to tens of percent in embedded cluster environments (R. J. Parker & S. P. Quanz 2012; W. Hao et al. 2013; M. S. Fujii & Y. Hori 2019). Lower-mass planets may also be ejected through fly-bys in embedded clusters. S. Chatterjee et al. (2012) considered the stability of Kepler -detectable systems in open clusters, demonstrating that the short-period pop-ulation of exoplanets accessible to the transit method should not generally be directly disrupted via clus-ter dynamics—though eccentricity excitation combined with planet-planet scattering may play an important in-direct role in ejection rates. By comparing simulations of multi-Jupiter and multi-Earth systems at separations ranging from roughly 1-200 AU, M. X. Cai et al. (2017) found that lower-mass wide-orbiting planetary systems have consistently higher survival rates, likely associated with their longer instability timescales (see e.g. Section 2.1.2). In the case that every star forms with several planets spanning a wide range of masses and separations set by the E. Kokubo & S. Ida (1998) oligarchic growth model, A. van Elteren et al. (2019) found that flyby en-counters in embedded clusters may produce 0.24-0.70 free-floating bodies per main-sequence star, spanning a wide mass range (0.01-130 MJ ; mean mass 1 .4MJ ) that includes and extends beyond the planetary regime. 4.5.2. Predictions and implications: flybys in evolved open clusters 

After leaving their natal molecular clouds, many stars remain in loosely bound, lower-density ( ≤ 10 2 stars pc −3) open clusters that slowly disperse through dy-namical interactions with passing stars and the galactic tide. I. A. Bonnell et al. (2001) performed simulations of these older open cluster environments with a fiducial velocity dispersion of 2 km/s, which they used to show that planets with orbital separations < 10 AU generally survive disruption by stellar encounters in open clusters over their lifetimes ( ≈1 Gyr). As such, only the widest-orbiting planets are likely ejected directly from stellar encounters in evolved open clusters. Giant exoplanets in evolved open clusters have been discovered with the radial velocity (A. Brucalassi et al. 2014; L. Malavolta et al. 2016) and transit methods (S. Meibom et al. 2013; A. W. Mann et al. 2016), all well interior to this orbital separation (at least in part due to limitations of these de-tection methods and available observational baselines). Using Runge-Kutta orbital integrations in the re-stricted 3-body limit, K. W. Smith & I. A. Bonnell (2001) found a relatively high typical velocity of of plan-ets liberated from equal-mass binary star systems in open clusters, peaking at around 6 km/s. Later N -body simulations by J. R. Hurley & M. M. Shara (2002), ex-amining the ejection of Jupiter-sized planets, found a lower typical velocity of roughly 2 km/s, potentially due to their use of unequal-mass binaries and system masses following the more observationally-driven initial mass function (IMF) of P. Kroupa et al. (1993). 4.5.3. Predictions and implications: flybys in globular clusters 

Globular clusters are high-density stellar environ-ments with mean densities of 10 3 stars pc −3 and densi-ties of up to 10 4 − 10 6 stars pc −3 in their cores. While their specific formation mechanisms remain under de-bate, the Milky Way’s globular clusters are classically thought to have originated through major mergers of disk galaxies, multiphase in situ collapse with highly effi-cient star formation early in the galaxy’s history, and/or the accretion of dwarf galaxies (J. P. Brodie & J. Strader 2006). The extreme birth conditions of globular clusters enabled them to survive to the present-day despite their formation 10-13 Gyr in the past, whereas open clusters typically disperse well within 1 Gyr (C. J. Lada & E. A. Lada 2003). Given the elevated stellar encounter rates of such high-density environments, S. Sigurdsson (1992) found that planets in globular clusters would typically be ren-dered unstable over the ages of their host systems, though follow-up work showed that planets on tight or-bits ( a ≲ 0.3 au) or those in less dense parts of glob-ular clusters may more easily survive (M. B. Davies & S. Sigurdsson 2001). I. A. Bonnell et al. (2001) mod-eled planetary ejection in globular cluster environments, adopting a fiducial velocity dispersion of 10 km/s and showing that planets with a ≳ 1 AU for stellar densi-ties > 10 3 stars pc −3, or a ≳ 0.1 AU for denser envi-ronments with > 10 4 stars pc −3, are typically ejected within the age of the globular cluster. A. S. Hamers & S. Tremaine (2017) more recently showed that orbital eccentricity excitation from frequent flybys in globular clusters commonly induces planetary ejection in some 20 systems while triggering high-eccentricity migration to-ward tightly bound, close-in orbits in others, providing a candidate hot-Jupiter formation pathway. An important underlying requirement for FFP pro-duction through stellar encounters is that planets must first form within the systems of interest. Very few exo-planets have been detected in globular clusters despite targeted searches (R. L. Gilliland et al. 2000; V. Nascim-beni et al. 2012), though the true implications for the occurrence of such planets remain under debate (e.g. V. Nascimbeni et al. 2012; K. Masuda & J. N. Winn 2017). Planets and planet candidates that have been found in-clude the PSR B1620-26 b circumbinary planet (S. E. Thorsett et al. 1993; Z. Arzoumanian et al. 1996; S. Sig-urdsson et al. 2003) as well as the M62H planetary-mass companion (though its high density, ρ = 11 g cm −3, at a mass of a few Jupiter masses places its planetary nature in question; L. Vleeschower et al. (2024)), both orbiting pulsars. An absence of detected planets could be interpreted as a natural outcome of rampant instabilities, or it could instead be indicative of formation limitations. In the case of globular clusters, the latter interpretation is sup-ported by evidence from the demographic properties of single-star systems residing outside of globular cluster environments. Globular clusters are comprised of very low-metallicity stars, and demographic surveys for plan-ets around similarly metal-poor stars in other environ-ments have thus far discovered few to no planets (D. A. Fischer & J. Valenti 2005; K. M. Boley et al. 2024). This suggests that the conditions for planet formation may not be as easily met in globular cluster environments. As introduced in Section 4.5.1, in cluster environments protoplanetary disks may be substantially truncated by photoevaporation from neighboring high-mass stars and tidal encounters from close flybys, which could suppress planet formation from its early stages. I. A. Bonnell et al. (2001) found that stellar densities must be rela-tively high, at ≳ 10 4 −10 5 stars pc −3, for disruptive disk encounters to occur within typical timescales for planet formation. These conditions are possible for young glob-ular clusters, such that planet formation may be sup-pressed in these environments. In the case that planets do form regularly in globu-lar clusters, how would the resulting FFPs be distin-guished? K. W. Smith & I. A. Bonnell (2001) mapped the velocity distributions of FFPs produced through ejection in globular clusters, demonstrating that they would typically have higher velocities (11 − 12 km/s) by comparison with FFPs ejected from open clusters. K. Kremer et al. (2019) carried out N −body simulations to show that up to 2 × 10 7 FFPs may be produced in the Galactic halo due to dynamical encounters and tidal loss in globular clusters, assuming that 10-50% of stars in globular clusters begin with planets. This population of FFPs, while small relative to the full population, may be distinguished through its differing galactic distribution: most other mechanisms would produce FFPs primar-ily originating in the galactic plane, whereas globular-cluster-produced FFPs should instead follow the spheri-cally isotropic distribution of globular clusters that pop-ulate the galactic halo. 4.5.4. How often do planets remain bound to the host cluster after being liberated from their host star? 

After they become unbound from their host star, cluster-ejected planets may either remain within their natal cluster or join the underlying population of FFPs within the galaxy, unbound from any stellar system. J. R. Hurley & M. M. Shara (2002) demonstrated that ejected planets may be liberated from dense cluster envi-ronments relatively slowly after being ejected from par-ent star systems toward the core of the cluster, drifting outward on timescales of 0.1-1 Gyr before joining the field population of FFPs. R. Spurzem et al. (2009) sim-ilarly found that FFPs in clusters do not exit immedi-ately; in their N −body cluster simulations, only ≈ 10% of FFPs typically escaped the cluster after a simulation time spanning a few million encounters between bound planets and passing stars. L. Wang et al. (2015) showed that planets liberated from their host cluster experience dozens of close encounters within 1000 AU prior to es-cape from the cluster’s potential well, in some cases fur-ther perturbing bound systems or resulting in re-capture by another star. R. J. Parker & S. P. Quanz (2012) found that roughly 30% of ejected Jovian-mass planets in their simulations become unbound from the birth cluster within 10 Myr. Planets that escape the cluster have relatively high ve-locities 5 − 10 km/s, with lower velocities for planets ejected from wider orbits (30 AU orbits vs. 5 AU or-bits in R. J. Parker & S. P. Quanz (2012)). X. Zheng et al. (2015) later applied N −body simulations to map out the range of outcomes from planetary disruption in cluster environments, showing the distribution of not only FFPs bound and unbound to the cluster, but also of star-planet systems that remain bound vs. ejected from the cluster. While some FFPs are ejected imme-diately and others remain bound longer in dispersing embedded clusters, all ejected FFPs in dispersing clus-ters ultimately become part of the background galactic population over ≈10 Myr timescales. Within stellar clusters, how are FFPs radially dis-tributed? F. Flammini Dotti et al. (2025) and F. Flam-mini Dotti et al. (2026) applied N −body simulations to 21 show that ejected low-mass bodies, such as planets and free-floating comets in clusters, should not undergo ob-servable mass segregation in clusters in the same way that higher-mass bodies such as brown dwarfs and stars do. This implies that the population of FFPs that re-main bound to a cluster would be potentially detectable throughout the cluster.  

> 5.

POST-MAIN-SEQUENCE PLANETARY EJECTION As a host star loses mass, the orbital properties of its surrounding planetary system correspondingly shift, in some cases making systems more susceptible to or directly inducing planetary ejection. In this section we consider how planetary orbits evolve in post-main-sequence systems, focusing on the implications for plan-etary ejection in two limits. The first of these is slow, adiabatic mass loss, as dur-ing the asymptotic giant branch (AGB) phase of stellar evolution. The second is effectively instantaneous mass loss, appropriate to describe planetary evolution dur-ing the explosion of a Type II (core-collapse) supernova when the host star exhausts its fuel and undergoes run-away gravitational collapse that causes the star to ex-plode. We note that the impulsive regime examined in this work may also be applicable for other cases in which the orbital period far exceeds the mass-loss timescale, such as the evolution of some Oort cloud objects during the tip of the red giant branch. More detailed discussion of post-main-sequence orbital evolution may be found in the review by D. Veras (2016). 5.1. The general variable-mass two-body problem 

Where mass loss is assumed to be isotropic, the equa-tions of motion in the variable-mass two-body prob-lem are quantified as (T. B. Omarov 1962; J. D. Had-jidemetriou 1963; A. Deprit 1983; L.-S. Li 2008; D. Veras et al. 2011; G. Voyatzis et al. 2013) 

μ ≡ M∗ + Mp (25) 

da dt = − a(1 + e2 + 2 e cos f )1 − e2

1

μdμ dt (26) 

de dt = −(e + cos f ) 1

μdμ dt (27) 

di dt = dΩ

dt = 0 (28) 

dω dt = dϖ dt = − sin fe

1

μdμ dt (29) 

df dt = − dϖ dt + n(1 + e cos f )2

(1 − e2)3/2 . (30) These expressions describe the evolution of the orbit of a planet with mass Mp orbiting a star with mass M∗,where M∗ is changing to produce a nonzero dμ/dt . Here 

i is the planetary orbital inclination, ω is the argument of periastron, ϖ is the longitude of periastron, Ω is the longitude of ascending node, f is the true anomaly, and 

n is the mean motion 2 π/P for orbital period P . The more general case of anisotropic and time-dependent mass loss was examined in D. Veras et al. (2013) (see Equations 34-38 in their work), which showed that the anisotropic terms’ contributions scale as √a.5.2. The mass-loss index ΨFor a constant mass-loss rate α, the regimes of behav-ior may be described through a dimensionless “mass-loss index” Ψ introduced by D. Veras et al. (2011) as Ψ ≡ αnμ . (31) Here n = 2 π/P again corresponds to the planet’s mean motion for orbital period P , while μ is the summed sys-tem mass (Equation 25). The mass-loss index quantifies the relative timescales between the planet’s orbital pe-riod and the rate of stellar mass loss. Where Ψ ≪ 1a system falls into the adiabatic regime, in which the planet’s orbital period is much shorter than the mass-loss timescale. For effectively instantaneous mass loss in the impulse approximation, Ψ → ∞ .5.3. Direct ejection from slow mass loss 

We first consider the evolution of an individual planet’s orbit in the slow, adiabatic mass-loss regime— where the orbital period is significantly shorter than the mass-loss timescale. In this scenario, the planet’s eccen-tricity remains roughly constant as the semimajor axis grows and the orbit gradually widens. The periastron 

q increases monotonically with mass loss as (D. Veras et al. 2011) 

dq dt = − a(1 − e)(1 − cos f )1 + e

1

μdμ dt , (32) which can be used to determine whether a planet’s orbit is expanding more quickly than the radius of the stellar envelope. This can also be seen in Figure 2 of D. Veras et al. (2011), which shows a sample orbital evolution trajectory in the adiabatic regime. Eventually, the widening orbit’s period becomes com-parable to the mass-loss timescale (Ψ ≈ 1), transitioning the orbital evolution out of the adiabatic regime. When this transition takes place, df /dt begins to librate rather than circulating as in the adiabatic regime, introducing rapid, runaway evolution of the orbital eccentricity and 22 semimajor axis. The range of possible behavior is de-scribed in detail throughout D. Veras et al. (2011), and we refer the reader to this work for a more in-depth overview. Here we describe only certain orbital limits to provide insight into the qualitative behavior of sys-tems transitioning out of the adiabatic regime. Where f begins close to 0 ◦ or 180 ◦ and Ψ ≫ 1, li-bration in the true anomaly is small and thus f can be treated as effectively constant. For f = 0 ◦, this runaway is characterized as 

erunaway |f =0 ◦ = e0

μ0

μ +

 μ0

μ − 1



(33) 

arunaway |f =0 ◦ = a0(1 − e0)2 − μ0 

> μ

(1 + e0) (34) for initial semimajor axis a0, initial eccentricity e0, and initial summed mass μ0. In this regime, the eccentricity increases until the planet is ejected. At the other extreme where f = 180 ◦, the orbital eccentricity instead decreases toward e = 0. Once the orbit has circularized, |dϖ/dt | grows and forces df /dt to a nonzero value, changing f such that the planet’s orbit lands on another evolutionary track. df /dt is nonzero for all true anomalies other than f = 0 ◦, such that the value of f will continue to change until the system reaches 

f = 0 ◦, the eccentricity reaches the runaway growth track, and the planet is ultimately ejected. 5.4. Direct ejection in the impulse approximation 

We also consider the fast mass-loss limit in which all mass is lost instantaneously, corresponding to the im-pulse approximation. In this regime, Ψ → ∞ . The change in stellar mass from the initial value μi to the fi-nal value μf is characterized by the multiplicative factor 

β, given as 

μf = βμ i (35) for 0 < β ≤ 1. In the impulse approximation, D. Veras et al. (2011) showed that a planet is ejected in the case that 

β < 1 + e20 + 2 e0 cos f0

2(1 + e0 cos f0) (36) where initial eccentricity is e0 and initial true anomaly is f0.We can see from Equation 36 that, for e0 = 0 and the limiting case cos f0 → 0, more than half of the stellar mass must be lost instantaneously to eject a planet. For highly eccentric planets, depending on the true anomaly the planets may be more or less readily ejected from the system. Systems that most easily survive lie on highly eccentric orbits with f0 ≈ 180 ◦. Maps of the parameter space for bound and ejected planets are shown in Figure 7 for three example β values. 5.5. Post-main-sequence planetary close encounters 

The orbital shifts induced by stellar evolution, in ei-ther the adiabatic regime or the impulse approxima-tion regime, have the potential to trigger instabilities by pushing planetary orbits toward close approaches. As a result, the same planet-planet scattering instabilities de-scribed in Section 2 may be hastened through the stellar evolution process, even in the case that planets are not directly ejected by the host star’s evolution. Significant precedent from work leveraging N −body simulations has shown that planet-planet orbital insta-bilities are commonly triggered through the process of stellar evolution. Early work by M. J. Duncan & J. J. Lissauer (1998) used numerical simulations to show that the time to instability in the post-main-sequence solar system scales as a power law with the mass ratio be-tween the sun and its neighboring planets, for ratios 

≤ 0.4 times the current value. J. H. Debes & S. Sig-urdsson (2002) generalized this result to a broader range of planetary system architectures, demonstrating that two-planet systems that began marginally Hill stable (G. W. Hill 1886; B. Gladman 1993)—that is, stable against close approaches between planets—can become quickly susceptible to planet-planet instabilities through post-main-sequence stellar mass loss. The timescales of induced instabilities are often short relative to system lifetimes, such that they may have occurred in the past for many evolved star systems that host exoplanets. G. Voyatzis et al. (2013), for example, showed that instabilities in two-planet systems tend to occur in under 100 Myr for systems that undergo chaotic evolution due to stellar mass loss. A. J. Mustill et al. (2014) demonstrated that ejection-inducing instabilities are common for three-planet white dwarf systems, typ-ically occurring at cooling ages of a few hundred Myr with ejections a factor of 3.9 times more likely during the white dwarf phase than during the host star’s main-sequence phase. More recently, R. F. Maldonado et al. (2022) carried out a suite of N −body simulations ex-amining systems with 2-6 planets, demonstrating that the instability rate increases with planet multiplicity irrespective of the planet masses and range of separa-tions, but that ejection in particular (rather than orbit-crossing events that do not result in ejection) is most efficient for systems of multiple high-mass planets. Ob-served short-period giant exoplanets found around red giant branch stars show orbital eccentricities effectively tracing the upper limit predicted for planet-planet scat-23              

> Figure 7. Planetary ejection regimes in the impulse approximation during a supernova explosion, shown for β= 0 .8, 0.5, and 0.3 where β=μf/μ iis the fractional stellar mass that remains after near-instantaneous mass loss. Here e0and f0are the initial orbital eccentricity and true anomaly of the planetary orbit. For higher fractional mass loss (increasing left to right across the three panels), planets are ejected across a wider range of true anomaly values. Note that for a planet to be ejected, it must survive the supernova without being destroyed by interactions with the stellar ejecta.

tering at a given orbital separation (S. K. Grunblatt et al. 2022)—a suggestive signature of planet-planet or-bital instabilities in the past histories of evolved plane-tary systems. 5.6. Increased susceptibility to flyby-induced ejection 

Another secondary planetary-ejection-related implica-tion of stellar evolution is the increased flyby rate for surviving planets in an evolved system. Planetary or-bits expand during post-main-sequence stellar evolution, such that the effective target area for a stellar or plan-etary flyby encounter also increases. This makes any given system that preserves its planets—that is, a sys-tem that does not have its full planetary system engulfed by the host star—more susceptible to planetary ejection through flybys. In the limit of slow, spherically-symmetric mass loss, planetary orbital separations evolve as a ∝ M −1 

> ∗

due to the approximate conservation of specific angular mo-mentum. This means that a star losing half its mass will have its neighboring planets’ orbits expand by a factor of 2 in the gravitational focusing regime ( σ ∝ a), or a factor of 4 in the geometric cross-section regime ( σ ∝ a2;see Section 4.2). The close stellar encounter occurrence rate (Equation 23) increases by a commensurate factor. J. K. Zink et al. (2020) showed that the sun’s or-bital expansion will enable close stellar encounters to ultimately (within 100-1000 Gyr) destabilize all of the outer solar system giant planets. This process, however, is slow: the first planet is typically ejected within ≈ 30 Gyr in simulations considered by J. K. Zink et al. (2020). S. N. Raymond et al. (2024) found that individual flybys even within 100 AU would likely not destabilize any of the solar system planets: instead, multiple stellar flybys would generally be necessary to produce a sufficiently large change in acceleration to trigger planetary ejec-tion. Flybys in post-main-sequence systems were examined in further detail and within a Galactic context by D. Ve-ras et al. (2014), who predicted a high rate of FFP pro-duction from stellar flybys in the galactic bulge. R. J. Parker & D. Veras (2026) recently simulated the evo-lution of planets orbiting white dwarf progenitor stars with 1 ≤ M/M ⊙ < 2.5 in dense (10 4M⊙ pc −3) em-bedded cluster environments, simultaneously modeling the influence of stellar evolution and N −body inter-actions. Incorporating the influence of orbit-widening from white dwarf evolution, R. J. Parker & D. Veras (2026) showed that up to 48% of their simulated plan-ets orbiting white dwarfs, which include Jupiter-mass planets uniformly placed at 0.1-50 AU initial orbital sep-arations, were disrupted to become FFPs. Their work predicts that many white dwarfs may subsequently cap-ture these ejected FFPs, culminating in a population of wide-orbiting white-dwarf planets with semimajor axes 

a > 100 AU and high orbital eccentricities e > 0.5. 5.7. White dwarf kicks 

Anisotropies—that is, deviations from perfect spher-ical symmetry—in mass loss during the AGB phase of stellar evolution produce a recoil kick of ≲ 2 km/s on the stellar remnant, often referred to as a “white dwarf kick” (M. Fellhauer et al. 2003; K. El-Badry & H.-W. Rix 2018). The dynamical influence of mass-loss anisotropies 24 has been examined within the impulse approximation (J. G. Hills 1983) as well as within the slower, adiabatic mass-loss regime (H.-C. Hwang & N. L. Zakamska 2025; C. E. O’Connor 2026). The implications of white dwarf kicks for planetary ejection have been most explicitly modeled in the im-pulse approximation, appropriate for wide binaries at separations < 1000 au (C. E. O’Connor 2026). In this case, A. P. Stephan & K. G. Stassun (2026) leveraged 

N −body models together with the velocity distribution of white dwarf kicks derived in K. El-Badry & H.-W. Rix (2018) to demonstrate that white dwarf kicks rarely trigger direct planetary ejection ( ≲ 1 − 2% of known ex-oplanet systems). Instead, they tend to excite orbital eccentricities and inclinations that induce instabilities over time in multi-planet systems (see also Section 5.5). A. P. Stephan & K. G. Stassun (2026) finds that such instabilities result in planetary ejection within 5 Myr for 

∼ 40 − 50% of known exoplanet systems in which the planetary orbits would not be engulfed during the AGB phase of stellar evolution. Although A. P. Stephan & K. G. Stassun (2026) finds that FFPs produced by white dwarf kicks can reproduce only of order a few percent of the total FFP population, they also predict that such planets should slowly drift from their hosts at a rate of roughly 0.75 pc/Myr (0.73 km/s), offering a potential avenue toward identification. 5.8. The role of binarity in planetary ejection for evolving stellar systems 

Up to this point, this section has focused primarily on planetary ejection in the case that an evolving single star is the planet host, unbound to any companion stars. The range of ejection scenarios is, however, more ex-pansive when considering binary and higher-multiplicity systems, including influences from Type II supernovae of both stars, Type Ia supernovae, and common envelope evolution. These possibilities were mapped by D. Veras & C. A. Tout (2012), who delineated the critical semimajor axes beyond which planets became unbound as a function of binary parameters, metallicity, and changing mass loss rate. This work showed that circumbinary ( p−type) planets are particularly susceptible to ejection during the post-main-sequence evolution of one or both stars in their system, with projected ejection rates that are highly dependent upon the binary properties and ini-tial planet semimajor axes. A. Nigioni et al. (2026) built upon this work by examining comparable two, three, four, and five-planet circumbinary systems. These authors showed that planetary ejection is common in such systems and that a modest sample of remnant, lower-multiplicity bound planets may be detectable with the future Laser Interferometer Space Antenna (LISA) gravitational wave observatory (P. Amaro-Seoane et al. 2017). While D. Veras & C. A. Tout (2012) did not explic-itly model evolving binary systems with s−type plan-ets, they noted that planets in close binaries are likely to be destroyed by stellar evolution, whereas planets in wider binaries evolve more similarly to single-star sys-tems with evolving stellar hosts. K. M. Kratter & H. B. Perets (2012) showed that for planets on s−type orbits in binary star systems, stellar evolution may lead to an exchange of planets between stars for relatively large semimajor axis ratios ap/a ∗ ≳ 0.1, though their simu-lations were set up such that the minimum Jacobi con-stant reached by their simulations precluded ejection as a potential outcome. D. Veras et al. (2017) later mod-eled the dynamical evolution of s−type two-planet sys-tems in which the planet host undergoes stellar evolution with a bound stellar companion—showing that systems remain stable over 14 Gyr in the case that an e = 0 binary companion is at least seven times as distant as the outer planetary orbit, with higher instability rates for more eccentric binaries. 5.9. Predictions and implications: post-main-sequence planetary ejection 

While each of the aforementioned mechanisms has the potential to produce FFPs, direct planetary ejec-tion from post-main-sequence stellar evolution likely plays a relatively minor role in producing FFPs. By evolving stars along their evolutionary tracks, D. Ve-ras et al. (2011) showed that only planets on extremely wide orbits—typically at semimajor axes of hundreds to thousands of AU—are ejected during the AGB phase of stellar evolution. The same authors showed that nearly all planets that are not engulfed are ejected from or-bit around a Type II supernova: the runaway regime is reached for all true anomalies except for a narrow range around f0 = 180 ◦. However, these high-mass stars are uncommon, as the stellar IMF is heavily tilted toward lower-mass M stars. Planets forming at the wide separations necessary for AGB ejection are likely rare, as protoplanetary disks typically have dust disk radii of roughly 30-45 AU (J. J. Tobin et al. 2020). Nevertheless, it is possible that a small fraction of planetary systems (1 −5%) retain very-wide-orbiting planets at orbital separations of a few hun-dred to a few thousand AU, trapped after near-ejection by dynamical instabilities during the embedded cluster phase. Some objects ranging from planet- to brown-dwarf-mass have been found at these wide orbital sepa-25 rations (e.g. K. L. Luhman et al. 2011; V. Bailey et al. 2014; A. J. Bohn et al. 2020; M. Janson et al. 2021; A. J. Bohn et al. 2021). Although only a small fraction of all stars undergo Type II supernovae, the population of FFPs produced by this mechanism may be distinguishable from other FFP sub-populations due to their high ejection veloc-ities. Z. Reg´ aly et al. (2022) modeled high-velocity (1,000-10,000 km/s) stellar envelope ejections and found a wide range of resulting planetary ejection velocities, ranging from ≈ 1 − 275 km/s and a mean ejection ve-locity of ⟨vejec ⟩ = 18 km/s. Secondary influences from post-main-sequence stellar evolution, including enhanced rates of orbital instabili-ties and disruptive stellar flybys, also contribute to FFP production. Given the low rate of FFPs expected di-rectly from slow mass loss, together with the small frac-tion of stars that undergo Type II supernovae, these sec-ondary effects likely represent the most dominant mech-anisms for FFP production through post-main-sequence stellar evolution.  

> 6.

DISCUSSION 6.1. Relative rates of FFP production 

As discussed in the previous sections, several plane-tary ejection mechanisms have been examined in detail, with differing FFP production rates across stellar en-vironments. These mechanisms each contribute to the occurrence rate of free-floating planetary-mass objects. Therefore, FFPs as a whole will not follow any individ-ual predicted distribution that focuses on only a subset of stellar populations. Instead, they will emerge with overlapping distributions of properties. We provide a high-level summary of planetary ejection mechanisms in Table 1 alongside the projected prop-erties of FFPs produced by each mechanism. The ef-ficiency of ejection is described under the assumption that all stars host planets following known limits on ex-oplanet demographics. We also report the typical pro-jected excess ejection velocity ⟨v∞⟩ for each mechanism, noting that the velocity distributions are dependent on the system configuration at the time of ejection, with differing planet populations required for ejection across mechanisms. Several FFP production mechanisms have the potential to contribute a large fraction of the un-derlying population, including planet-planet scattering, embedded cluster encounters, and binary instabilities. To estimate rates in Table 1, we adopt the assump-tion from G. A. L. Coleman & W. DeRocco (2025) that planets on p−type orbits may form around binaries with separations of up to 3 AU. Considering binary instabil-ity rates from M. J. Holman & P. A. Wiegert (1999); B. Quarles et al. (2018), we use planet-to-star semimajor axis ratio ap/a b ≳ 0.1 as a threshold for s−type binary instability and assume that planets are typically located at a maximum semimajor axis of 30 AU, such that cir-cumstellar planets in binaries with ab ≲ 300 AU may be prone to instabilities. We also assume that circumstellar planets cannot form unless the host stars are separated by at least a factor of three times the typical snow line separation 3 AU, corresponding to binary separations of roughly ab ≳ 10 AU. Last, we consider only bina-ries with ab > 1000 AU as candidates for a substantial influence from the Galactic tide. Binary companion fractions are drawn as a func-tion of stellar mass from S. S. R. Offner et al. (2023), and we approximate that the same separation distri-butions extend over slightly wider mass ranges from 

M∗ = 0 .075 − 0.225 M⊙, M∗ = 0 .225 − 0.675 M⊙, and 

M∗ > 0.675 M⊙. The adopted separation distributions are shown in Figure 8 for reference. Combining these fits with the piecewise power-law IMF from P. Kroupa (2001), from which we find that 63%, 29%, and 8% of stars fit into the listed low-, medium-, and high-mass bins, we find that 9% of stars have a binary compan-ion that may induce p−type binary instabilities if cir-cumbinary planets form within the system, and 10% of stars have a binary companion that may induce s−type binary instabilities for circumstellar planets. The true rate of initial planet formation in these unstable regions is not well-characterized, such that it is possible that all such systems eject one or more planetary companions. For open (globular) clusters, we consider densities of roughly 10 2 (10 3) star pc −3 and report ejection rates for planets that would be disrupted within 1 (10) Gyr at orbital separations 3 AU (I. A. Bonnell et al. 2001). Embedded cluster encounters may result in either a very low or very high rate of planetary ejection depending on the planetary multiplicity and primordial orbital sepa-ration distribution (W. Hao et al. 2013); therefore, we report a range corresponding to outcomes for planets originating in multiplanet systems and spanning orbital separations of one to tens of AU. We also assume that the galactic tide and stellar flybys in wide binaries typically induce planet-planet scattering comparable to that experienced by single stars, corre-sponding to a similar ejection velocity and source distri-bution of planets. The ejection rate reported in Table 1 for wide binary star systems corresponds to that of N. A. Kaib et al. (2013) with a four-giant-planet outer solar system analog and binary separations 1,000-30,000 AU. We note that the “low-mass” label within Table 1 refers to planets below the highest-mass planet within the sys-tem, but that planet-planet scattering—including that 26                                                          

> Mechanism % stars ej. rate typical planet ejected ⟨v∞⟩References
> Planet-planet scattering 100% up to 100% low-mass, wide-orbiting 2-6 km/s [1,2,3,4]
> s−type binary instability 10% up to 100% any mass, wide-orbiting ?[3,4]
> p−type binary instability 9% up to 100% any mass, close-orbiting 2-12 km/s [3,4,5,6] Embedded cluster encounters 100% 30-70% any mass, wide-orbiting 5-10 km/s [7,14] Evolved open cluster encounters 10% 10% any mass, wide-orbiting 1-2 km/s [8] Globular cluster encounters 0.5% 80% any mass, wide-orbiting 11-12 km/s [9,10] Galactic tide + wide binaries 2% 30-60% low-mass, wide-orbiting 2-6 km/s [11] AGB-phase stellar evolution 5% ≲2% any mass, wide-orbiting 0.5-1 km/s [12,15,16] Type II supernovae 0.1-1% 100% any mass, any orbit 18 km/s [12,13]
> Table 1. Summary of the relative prevalence of and predictions for planetary ejection mechanisms. “% stars” refers to the percent of all stars that are susceptible to a given mechanism, and “ej. rate” refers to the percent of those systems that are predicted to eject at least one planet. The efficiency of planet ejection varies significantly with the locations and masses of formed planets; therefore, we describe the “typical planet ejected” in the fourth column. Typical excess velocities ⟨v∞⟩are listed in the fifth column. We note that FFPs may populate different parts of parameter space: for example, those ejected from clusters do not all immediately join the latent background population, and planets ejected from encounters in globular clusters may populate the galactic halo. References are as follows: [1] H. G. Bhaskar & H. B. Perets (2025), [2] K. Guo et al. (2025), [3] G. A. L. Coleman & W. DeRocco (2025), [4] S. S. R. Offner et al. (2023), [5] G. A. L. Coleman (2024), [6] M. Teasdale & D. Stamatellos (2026), [7] R. J. Parker & S. P. Quanz (2012), [8] J. R. Hurley & M. M. Shara (2002), [9] K. W. Smith & I. A. Bonnell (2001), [10] I. A. Bonnell et al. (2001), [11] N. A. Kaib et al. (2013), [12] D. Veras et al. (2011), [13] Z. Reg´ aly et al. (2022), [14] W. Hao et al. (2013), [15] M. W. O’Brien et al. (2024), [16] A. P. Stephan & K. G. Stassun (2026)

induced by galactic tide interactions—may still eject gi-ant planets if multiple are present. Importantly, not all free-floating planets are the prod-ucts of planetary ejection. Some FFPs may form in situ as the lowest-mass tail of the stellar initial mass function (K. L. Luhman 2012), including from erosion of prestellar cores in the vicinity of high-energy radia-tion from OB stars (A. P. Whitworth & H. Zinnecker 2004; J. L. Diamond & R. J. Parker 2024). Indeed, hun-dreds of planetary-mass objects have been discovered in star-forming regions since the turn of the century (e.g. Y. Oasa et al. 1999; P. W. Lucas & P. F. Roche 2000; M. R. Zapatero Osorio et al. 2000; K. L. Luhman 2004; A. Scholz et al. 2009; K. Muˇ zi´ c et al. 2012; K. L. Luh-man et al. 2016; J. Gagn´ e et al. 2017; M. Robberto et al. 2020; M. Gennaro & M. Robberto 2020; N. Miret-Roig et al. 2022; S. G. Pearson & M. J. McCaughrean 2023; K. L. Luhman et al. 2024; A. B. Langeveld et al. 2024; M. De Furio et al. 2025). Nevertheless, the high pro-jected occurrence rate of low-mass FFPs (T. Sumi et al. 2023), together with new limits on the lowest-mass self-luminous objects in young star-forming regions—which taper off below roughly 3 − 5MJ (A. B. Langeveld et al. 2024; M. De Furio et al. 2025)—indicates that many FFPs, if they are truly unbound and free-floating, must have formed in and subsequently been ejected from cir-cumstellar systems. Another important caveat is that apparent FFPs ob-served through microlensing are not necessarily un-bound. Many of these bodies may instead be wide-orbiting bound planets, with stellar hosts at sufficiently large projected separations such that they were not cap-tured by the microlensing event that identified the FFP. Thus, the true occurrence rate of FFPs retains signif-icant ambiguity. Observations before or after a mi-crolensing event, when the lens is tens to hundreds of mas in angular separation from its source, may be used to search for a potential host star and distinguish be-tween these scenarios. This typically requires at least several years in temporal separation, considering lens proper motion rates at microlensing event distances. A small number of searches have been conducted to date using post-event follow-up imaging (P. Mr´ oz et al. 2024) and precovery searches with archival data (M. Kapusta et al. 2026), with no significant detections of host stars to date. Even with a high rate of dynamical instabilities, not all scattered bodies are fully ejected. B. Gladman et al. (2002) found that planet-planet scattering could push Mars-sized embryos to extremely wide orbits of a few hundred AU, and this scenario was revisited by K. Sils-bee & S. Tremaine (2018) to further delineate the pa-rameter space for planetary embryos that may remain bound to the solar system in the present day. C. Scharf 27  

> Figure 8. Log-normal binary separation distributions adopted from S. S. R. Offner et al. (2023) and derived from data drawn from D. Raghavan et al. (2010). The adopted limiting regimes for three categories of binary-driven instabilities are shown as the shaded background regions. The percentage of all stars falling in a given mass range, derived from the P. Kroupa (2001) IMF, is shown together with the binary separation distribution for stars in that mass range that host a bound stellar companion.

& K. Menou (2009) and D. Veras et al. (2009) showed that even giant planets can be feasibly left on wide-orbiting, bound orbits at separations of hundreds of AU as the remnants of planet-planet scattering. In rare cases, scattered planets may be captured at orbital sepa-rations of thousands of AU as an Oort cloud population of exoplanets (D. Veras et al. 2009; N. Bailey & D. Fab-rycky 2019; S. N. Raymond et al. 2023; A. Izidoro et al. 2025). S. Hadden & Y. Wu (2025) leveraged scattering simulations in conjunction with updated microlensing constraints to predict that about half of Neptune-mass bodies that appear as FFPs may be on wide, bound or-bits, rather than being truly free-floating. While the mechanisms described in Table 1 can account for all candidate FFPs, not all such objects should necessar-ily be accounted for as unbound products of planetary ejection. 6.2. Observed properties of candidate FFPs 

Discoveries of free-floating planets have been made for decades using direct imaging, and more recently us-ing the gravitational microlensing method. Directly im-aged FFPs in star-forming regions, all of which have been super-Jupiter-mass ( ≥ 3 − 5MJ ) to date (A. B. Langeveld et al. 2024; M. De Furio et al. 2025), are gen-erally consistent with formation through direct collapse with no need to invoke planetary ejection to produce the population. As a result, we focus in this section on the FFPs identified through gravitational microlensing. Ground-based gravitational microlensing surveys for free-floating and bound exoplanets include the Opti-cal Gravitational Lensing Experiment (OGLE; A. Udal-ski et al. 2015), the Korea Microlensing Telescope Net-work (KMTNet; D.-J. Kim et al. 2018; C. B. Hender-son et al. 2014), and the Microlensing Observations in Astrophysics (MOA; J. B. Hearnshaw et al. 2006) project. The threshold for FFP candidate events is typ-ically placed at the bottom edge of the “Einstein desert”, which corresponds to a dearth of microlensing events found with angular Einstein radii 10 μas ≲ θE ≲ 30 μas (H.-W. Kim et al. 2021; Y.-H. Ryu et al. 2021). FFP candidates are generally reported for θE ≲ 10 μas, where the Einstein timescale tE and the angular Einstein ra-dius θE are defined as 

tE = θE

μrel 

(37) and 

θE ≡ pκM Lπrel (38) for 

κ ≡ 4Gc2 au . (39) Here ML is the lens mass, πrel is the relative lens-source parallax, and μrel is the lens-source relative proper mo-tion. 28 Roughly a dozen microlensing FFP candidates have been reported to date that are attributed to low-mass (super-Earth-mass or below) planets that are unlikely to have formed through direct collapse (T. Sumi et al. 2011; P. Mr´ oz et al. 2017; P. Mr´ oz et al. 2018; P. Mr´ oz et al. 2019; P. Mr´ o z et al. 2020; P. Mr´ oz et al. 2020; H.-W. Kim et al. 2021; Y.-H. Ryu et al. 2021; N. Koshimoto et al. 2023; Y. K. Jung et al. 2024; R. Poleski et al. 2025; T. Inyanya et al. 2026; S. Dong et al. 2026a; Y.-H. Ryu et al. 2026). The completeness-corrected high occurrence of these isolated objects has been leveraged to argue for a high rate of FFPs particularly at the low-mass end, with estimates from T. Sumi et al. (2023) corresponding to a total of 80 +73 

> −47

M⊕ ejected per star for objects in the mass range 0 .33 < M/M ⊕ < 6660. The history of any individual FFP ranges from dif-ficult to impossible to definitively determine. This is for the same reasons that it is difficult to definitively show the origin system of the interstellar object ’Oumua-mua, as discussed by A. Morbidelli et al. (2020): the processes that produce FFPs are chaotic, and it is im-possible to integrate an object’s trajectory backward in time to determine its origin (which would violate the second law of thermodynamics). In combination with the short dynamical lifetimes of free-floating bodies in the Galaxy, this means that orbital paths cannot be directly traced backward to origin systems unless the objects were ejected in the recent past. Some efforts have been made to identify possible progenitor systems for observed interstellar objects under the assumption of recent ejection, with plausible hosts reported for each discovered interstellar object (Q. Zhang 2018; F. Feng & H. R. A. Jones 2018; P. A. Dybczy´ nski & M. Kr´ olikowska 2018; C. A. L. Bailer-Jones et al. 2018; S. Portegies Zwart et al. 2018; J. I. Zuluaga et al. 2018; C. A. L. Bailer-Jones et al. 2020; S. Portegies Zwart 2021; Y. Guo et al. 2025). Some information may still be gleaned from the veloc-ities of FFPs, even if their specific histories are difficult (or impossible) to unambiguously disentangle. In most cases, microlensing events associated with FFPs do not correspond to directly measured masses; instead, mi-crolensing measurements provide tE , which is a degen-erate combination of the true mass, the object velocity, and the distance to the lensing body. The measure-ment of finite-source effects (H. J. Witt & S. Mao 1994) can break one of these degeneracies; however, an intrin-sic degeneracy typically remains. This final degeneracy was broken in one recent case reported by S. Dong et al. (2026a), in which combined observations from ground-based telescopes (OGLE and KMTNet) and the Gaia 

spacecraft provided a parallax measurement of the event alongside measurements of tE and θE . The most favored solution for the system corresponds to lens transverse ve-locities vl,l, VSR = −48 +23  

> −41

km/s and vl,b, VSR = 79 ± 12 km/s relative to the vicinity standard of rest (VSR) de-scribing neighboring stars. While the velocity deviation of the FFP from the VSR is consistent with the Galac-tic velocity distributions within 2 σ, the potentially high observed velocity of this object is suggestive of ejection through a mechanism that can impart high relative ve-locities, such as instabilities in a tight circumbinary sys-tem or a Type II supernova explosion. 6.3. Sub-planetary-mass ejected bodies 

In addition to planetary-mass ejected bodies, lower-mass free-floating objects are, in many cases, subject to the same ejection mechanisms described within this review. Understanding the properties of sub-planetary-mass ejected bodies may therefore offer useful insights into the ejection rates and mechanisms relevant for the FFP population. We do not attempt to provide a com-prehensive overview of results oriented around the ejec-tion of these sub-planetary-mass objects here. Instead, we provide a few key points to contextualize the lower-mass ejected population in light of current constraints on planetary-mass objects’ ejection. In the past decade, the first three interstellar objects— 1I/’Oumuamua (G. V. Williams et al. 2017; K. J. Meech et al. 2017), 2I/Borisov (G. Borisov et al. 2019; D. Jewitt & J. Luu 2019; P. Guzik et al. 2020), and 3I/ATLAS (L. Denneau et al. 2025; B. T. Bolin et al. 2025; D. Z. Selig-man et al. 2025)—were discovered. These objects have radii of ∼ 0.1 − 3 km (K. J. Meech et al. 2017; D. Jewitt et al. 2017; M. M. Knight et al. 2017; M. Drahus et al. 2018; D. Jewitt et al. 2020; D. Jewitt & D. Z. Seligman 2023; D. Jewitt et al. 2025), and they were discovered passing through the solar system on hyperbolic orbits, unbound to the sun. Several studies have explored the ejection of small bodies from their host planetary systems, largely with the goal of explaining the demographics of interstel-lar objects (for a review, see e.g. ’Oumuamua ISSI Team et al. 2019). These studies have made several key points. First, the known exoplanet population, which has been largely discovered by the transit and radial ve-locity methods, contains relatively few planets capable of efficiently ejecting small bodies (G. Laughlin & K. Batygin 2017; M. Rice & G. Laughlin 2019). Neverthe-less, statistical evidence from planet searches that are less biased toward short-period planets, including sug-gestive evidence drawn from protoplanetary disk gaps in S. Zhang et al. (2018) and microlensing searches in D. Suzuki et al. (2016), indicates that wide-orbiting, 29 Neptune-mass planets—efficient interstellar object ejec-tors (M. Rice & G. Laughlin 2019)—are common. Sec-ond, comet-like planetesimals are far more likely to be ejected than asteroid-like ones (S. N. Raymond et al. 2018). This result stems from the expectation that rocky planetesimals are found much closer to their host stars, where they are typically accreted rather than ejected. Beyond the snow line there is also far more space to form planetesimals, for simple geometric reasons, enabling the production of a large population of icy interstellar ob-ject seeds. Third, planetesimals may undergo significant processing on their pathway to ejection, including tidal disruption and thermal processing (M. ´Cuk 2018; S. N. Raymond et al. 2018; Y. Zhang & D. N. C. Lin 2020). Like FFPs, interstellar objects may be produced by mechanisms other than scattering in single-star systems—including ejection from close binary star sys-tems (A. P. Jackson et al. 2018) and gravitational strip-ping of distant objects during stellar flybys (K. Vincke & S. Pfalzner 2016; S. Portegies Zwart et al. 2018; T. O. Hands et al. 2019). The projected velocity distributions of interstellar objects may in principle be differentiated between formation scenarios: S. Pfalzner et al. (2021) modeled differences in interstellar object velocities for the cases of production by stellar evolution (typically 

< 0.5 km/s), flybys (typically < 1 km/s), and planet-planet scattering (typically above 2-3 km/s). Ejection from circumbinary systems would likely produce inter-stellar objects at even higher velocities (G. A. L. Cole-man 2024). Unlike interstellar objects, the detection of free-floating exomoons remains elusive. Nevertheless, use-ful limits may be placed in the near future on moon-mass objects that remain bound to their host stars. Mi-crolensing observations with the NASA Nancy Grace Roman space telescope (D. Spergel et al. 2015; R. Akeson et al. 2019) are projected to enable the first population-level studies of moon-mass, bound objects (M. T. Penny et al. 2019) down to a Ganymede mass (0.025 M⊕), demonstrating the rate at which sub-Earth-mass bodies persist on wide orbits without having un-dergone either collisions or ejections. Considering true solar-system analog exomoons, projections indicate that of order one bound exomoon with moon-planet mass ra-tio 10 −4 −10 −2 around a wide-separation (0 .3−30 au) gi-ant (30 M⊕ − 10 MJup ) planet will be detectable with the current Roman observing strategy (M. Lastovka et al. 2025). S. A. Johnson et al. (2020) and W. DeRocco et al. (2026) each showed that Roman will be sensitive to free-floating objects down to roughly the mass of Mars (0.1 M⊕), with sensitivity that drops rapidly at lower masses. Some FFPs detected by Roman may have orig-inated as moons if a subset of exoplanets hosts moons more massive than those in the solar system. For such low-mass free-floating bodies, it will likely be difficult to distinguish between objects that were initially moons and those that were planetesimals in their natal systems. 6.4. Future prospects 

We stand at a key inflection point, with rich prospects for future observations from which we may glean insights into the processes underlying planetary ejection. Up-coming space missions with dedicated surveys amenable to microlensing FFP searches have the potential to provide unprecedented observational constraints on the properties of FFP populations. The NASA Nancy Grace Roman space telescope, with projected launch in late 2026, offers tremendous prospects for upcoming microlensing detections of FFPs. Hundreds of FFPs are projected to be discovered by the mission’s Core Community Surveys (S. A. Johnson et al. 2020), which would increase the number of known FFPs by a factor of ten. With a sufficiently large cen-sus of planets discovered to enable population studies, the FFPs discovered by Roman are projected to enable distinctions between current, competing models for the FFP mass function (W. DeRocco et al. 2026). The Earth 2.0 mission, led by the Shanghai Astronom-ical Observatory through the Chinese Academy of Sci-ences for projected launch in late 2028, is also expected to find hundreds of FFPs during its four-year primary mission. Notably, this includes roughly 150 FFPs for which true masses will be measured from simultaneous parallax measurements through synergistic observations with KMTNet (J. Ge et al. 2022). These parallax mea-surements offer an unprecedented opportunity to char-acterize the transverse velocities of the lenses at scale, as in S. Dong et al. (2026b), for comparison with excess velocities imparted through distinct planetary ejection models. On the theoretical side, inroads that would be particu-larly useful in advancing planetary ejection include clear formation-informed predictions for the planetary mass function at wide separations. How commonly do low-mass planets form at and beyond the ice line of a pro-toplanetary disk, where planetary ejection is efficient? How often do planets form on wide orbits in s−type binary star systems and in dense stellar cluster envi-ronments? Inroads have been made in connecting mi-crolensing, direct imaging, and ALMA disk constraints with the stellar and planetary mass functions (J. C. Yee & S. J. Kenyon 2025), and further such limits offer a pathway toward determining what fraction of FFP can-didates are truly unbound. 30 The observed occurrence of FFPs provides an oppor-tunity to characterize the total mass budget available for planet formation—which the classic minimum-mass so-lar nebula (S. J. Weidenschilling 1977) and its extrasolar analog (E. Chiang & G. Laughlin 2013) would generally underestimate relative to the population of free-floating planets. Heavier Class 0/I disks may be necessary to in-voke to account for the high observed mass budget, if it is confirmed with upcoming observations (E. J. Lee et al. 2026). Constraints on the initial mass budgets of plan-etary systems have the potential to further inform the relative rates with which contributions from individual planetary ejection mechanisms may be capped.  

> 7.

SUMMARY Planetary ejection is ubiquitous across environment, stellar multiplicity, and the life cycle of a stellar system: where planets form, planets are ejected. For a planetary system to form, its building blocks must have undergone instabilities, leading to orbit crossing and subsequent collisions through which planets grow. This process does not end with the formation of planets. In some cases, these continued instabilities may culminate in planetary ejection. In this review, we have discussed the dynamical mech-anisms relevant for planetary ejection, including both underlying principles and the current state of the field. We provide some high-level summary points as follows. 

• Roughly a dozen candidate low-mass, sub-Jovian FFPs have been discovered by microlensing sur-veys. When incorporating survey completeness metrics, this discovery rate corresponds to a vast background population of low-mass FFPs. While higher-mass, directly-imaged FFPs—often found in star-forming regions—may form in situ through direct collapse, lower-mass FFPs demand an al-ternative explanation. This implies a high rate of planetary ejection. 

• Planets may be ejected from their host systems through dynamical mechanisms including planet-planet scattering, binary instabilities (including resonance-overlap-driven orbital evolution, as well as eccentricity excitation by passing stars and the galactic tide), stellar and planetary flybys, and post-main-sequence orbital evolution. All of these mechanisms make some contribution to the popu-lation of FFPs. 

• Though multiple mechanisms play a role in pro-ducing the FFP population, planet-planet scatter-ing, embedded cluster encounters, and binary in-stabilities are likely predominant in FFP produc-tion. The true prevalence of planetary ejection via each mechanism examined in this work is set by the initial mass and semimajor axis distribution of planets forming across stellar environments. 

• Radial-velocity and transiting exoplanet observa-tions have revealed a prevalence of highly eccentric orbits among observed giant planets, together with architectural trends such as the dense packing of planetary systems on the brink of instability, that are suggestive of past planetary system instabili-ties. At a population level, these architectural ves-tiges may be the signposts of previous planetary ejection events. 

• Upcoming microlensing surveys have the poten-tial to place limits on the planetary initial mass function from the occurrence of FFPs while also improving constraints on the occurrence of wide-orbiting, sub-Jupiter-mass planets. In these ways, among others, upcoming surveys will inform the characteristics of both FFPs and their potential parent populations. Understanding the dynamics of planetary ejection re-quires an overarching synergy of techniques. It is in-formed by the occurrence of mature long-period plan-ets that remain bound after planetary ejection, mea-sured through radial velocity and astrometry surveys. It is informed by the transit-identified dearth of reso-nant chains, and by the fingerprints of those few pristine remnant resonant systems that have evaded instability. It is informed by the prevalence of young, wide-orbiting giant planets from interferometric protoplanetary disk imaging, by direct-imaging limits in the cradles of planet formation, and by the discovery of FFPs and the de-mographics of wide-orbiting planets offered through mi-crolensing. Each nexus in this web of constraints provides a small piece of the broader puzzle of planetary ejection. Plane-tary ejection extends to the heart of fundamental ques-tions about how planetary systems form and evolve: how are planets distributed at birth? In which environments do they form? And in what ways does the current set of bound systems differ from the demographics at various points in the planetary systems’ life cycles? These are large-scale problems, yet they are remark-ably tractable. Significant, substantive progress has been made and remains to be made in coming decades— from the discovery of the first exoplanets only a few decades ago to the advent of ground- and space-based exoplanet-oriented surveys today. It has become pos-sible to map not only the demographics of planetary 31 systems, but also the demographics of the now-invisible ,past states of planetary systems. A complete picture of planetary systems’ life cycles—at least the fuzzy outline, if not the fully sharpened image—may not be so far out of reach. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We are grateful to the organizers of the 2025 Rogue Worlds Two conference, through which the core con-tent of this article was originally presented as a review talk. We also thank the anonymous reviewer for helpful feedback that has strengthened this manuscript. M.R. acknowledges support from the Heising-Simons Foun-dation through Grants #2021-2802 and #2023-4478. S.N.R. is grateful to the ANR’s PEPR-Origins and CNRS/INSU’s PNP programs for support. W.D. was supported by NSF grant PHY-2210361 and the Mary-land Center for Fundamental Physics. AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS M.R. was responsible for formulating and writing the manuscript. W.D. and S.N.R. each provided feedback on and contributed ideas toward refining the manuscript. 

# Software: astropy ( Astropy Collaboration et al. 2013; A. M. Price-Whelan et al. 2018; Astropy Collabo-ration et al. 2022), astroquery (A. Ginsburg et al. 2019), 

matplotlib (J. D. Hunter 2007), numpy (T. E. Oliphant 2006; S. v. d. Walt et al. 2011; C. R. Harris et al. 2020), 

pandas (W. McKinney 2010), scipy (P. Virtanen et al. 2020) REFERENCES 

Adams, F. C., Hollenbach, D., Laughlin, G., & Gorti, U. 2004, ApJ, 611, 360, doi: 10.1086/421989 Adams, F. C., & Laughlin, G. 2001, Icarus, 150, 151, doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6567 Adams, F. C., & Laughlin, G. 2003, Icarus, 163, 290, doi: 10.1016/S0019-1035(03)00081-2 Adams, F. C., Proszkow, E. M., Fatuzzo, M., & Myers, P. C. 2006, ApJ, 641, 504, doi: 10.1086/500393 Akeson, R., Armus, L., Bachelet, E., et al. 2019, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1902.05569, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1902.05569 Alvarado-Montes, J. A., Zuluaga, J. I., & Sucerquia, M. 2017, MNRAS, 471, 3019, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1745 Amaro-Seoane, P., Audley, H., Babak, S., et al. 2017, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1702.00786, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1702.00786 Andrews, S. M., Huang, J., P´ erez, L. M., et al. 2018, ApJL, 869, L41 Armitage, P. J. 2000, A&A, 362, 968, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0007044 Arzoumanian, Z., Joshi, K., Rasio, F. A., & Thorsett, S. E. 1996, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 105, IAU Colloquium 160: Pulsars: Problems and Progress, ed. S. Johnston, M. A. Walker, & M. Bailes, 525–530, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/9605141 Astropy Collaboration, Robitaille, T. P., Tollerud, E. J., et al. 2013, A&A, 558, A33, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322068 Astropy Collaboration, Price-Whelan, A. M., Lim, P. L., et al. 2022, ApJ, 935, 167, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c74 ´Avila-Bravo, M., Charalambous, C., & Aguilera-G´ omez, C. 2026, A&A, 706, A121, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202557225 Bailer-Jones, C. A. L., Farnocchia, D., Meech, K. J., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 205, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aae3eb Bailer-Jones, C. A. L., Farnocchia, D., Ye, Q., Meech, K. J., & Micheli, M. 2020, A&A, 634, A14, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201937231 Bailey, N., & Fabrycky, D. 2019, AJ, 158, 94, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab2d2a Bailey, V., Meshkat, T., Reiter, M., et al. 2014, ApJL, 780, L4, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/780/1/L4 Barclay, T., Quintana, E. V., Raymond, S. N., & Penny, M. T. 2017, ApJ, 841, 86, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aa705b Barnes, R., & Quinn, T. 2004, ApJ, 611, 494, doi: 10.1086/421321 Barnes, R., & Raymond, S. N. 2004, ApJ, 617, 569, doi: 10.1086/423419 Baron, F., Lafreni` ere, D., Artigau, ´E., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 187, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab4130 Bartram, P., Wittig, A., Lissauer, J. J., Gavino, S., & Urrutxua, H. 2021, MNRAS, 506, 6181, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab1465 Batalha, N. M., Rowe, J. F., Bryson, S. T., et al. 2013, ApJS, 204, 24, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/204/2/24 Batygin, K., & Brown, M. E. 2010, ApJ, 716, 1323, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/716/2/1323 Batygin, K., Brown, M. E., & Betts, H. 2012, ApJL, 744, L3, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/744/1/L3 Benest, D. 1988a, Celestial Mechanics, 43, 47, doi: 10.1007/BF01234553 32 

Benest, D. 1988b, A&A, 206, 143 Benest, D. 1993, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 56, 45, doi: 10.1007/BF00699718 Bhaskar, H. G., & Perets, H. B. 2025, The Astrophysical Journal, 991, 132, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adf4e2 Black, D. C. 1982, AJ, 87, 1333, doi: 10.1086/113220 Bohn, A. J., Kenworthy, M. A., Ginski, C., et al. 2020, ApJL, 898, L16, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aba27e Bohn, A. J., Ginski, C., Kenworthy, M. A., et al. 2021, A&A, 648, A73, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202140508 Boley, A. C., Payne, M. J., & Ford, E. B. 2012, ApJ, 754, 57, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/754/1/57 Boley, K. M., Christiansen, J. L., Zink, J., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 128, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad6570 Bolin, B. T., Belyakov, M., Fremling, C., et al. 2025, MNRAS, 542, L139, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slaf078 Bolmont, E., Galantay, E., Blanco-Cuaresma, S., Oza, A. V., & Mordasini, C. 2025, A&A, 704, A9, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202554625 Bonnell, I. A., Smith, K. W., Davies, M. B., & Horne, K. 2001, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 322, 859, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04171.x Bonomo, A. S., H´ ebrard, G., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2017, A&A, 603, A43, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201730624 Borisov, G., Durig, D. T., Sato, H., et al. 2019, Comet C/2019 Q4 (Borisov),, Central Bureau Electronic Telegrams, No. 4666 Borucki, W. J., Koch, D., Basri, G., et al. 2010, Science, 327, 977 Borucki, W. J., Koch, D. G., Basri, G., et al. 2011, ApJ, 736, 19, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/736/1/19 Bouy, H., Duchˆ ene, G., Strampelli, G., et al. 2026, A&A, 708, A218, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202555031 Bowler, B. P. 2016, PASP, 128, 102001, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/128/968/102001 Brasil, P. I. O., Roig, F., Nesvorn´ y, D., et al. 2016, Icarus, 266, 142, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2015.11.015 Brodie, J. P., & Strader, J. 2006, ARA&A, 44, 193, doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.44.051905.092441 Brown, G., Malhotra, R., & Rein, H. 2025, The Open Journal of Astrophysics, 8, E161, doi: 10.33232/001c.146688 Brown, G., & Rein, H. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 5942, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1763 Brucalassi, A., Pasquini, L., Saglia, R., et al. 2014, A&A, 561, L9, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322584 Busetti, F., Beust, H., & Harley, C. 2018, A&A, 619, A91, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833097 Cai, M. X., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., Portegies Zwart, S. F., & Spurzem, R. 2017, MNRAS, 470, 4337, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx1464 Cai, M. X., Portegies Zwart, S., & van Elteren, A. 2018, MNRAS, 474, 5114, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx3064 ´Calovi´ c, A., Nayakshin, S., Casewell, S., & Miret-Roig, N. 2026, MNRAS, 545, staf2097, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf2097 Carrera, D., Raymond, S. N., & Davies, M. B. 2019, A&A, 629, L7, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935744 Chambers, J. E. 2001, Icarus, 152, 205, doi: 10.1006/icar.2001.6639 Chambers, J. E., Wetherill, G. W., & Boss, A. P. 1996, Icarus, 119, 261, doi: 10.1006/icar.1996.0019 Chatterjee, S., Ford, E. B., Geller, A. M., & Rasio, F. A. 2012, MNRAS, 427, 1587, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.22057.x Chatterjee, S., Ford, E. B., Matsumura, S., & Rasio, F. A. 2008, ApJ, 686, 580 Chen, J., & Kipping, D. 2017, ApJ, 834, 17, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/834/1/17 Chiang, E., & Laughlin, G. 2013, MNRAS, 431, 3444, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt424 Chirikov, B. V. 1979, PhR, 52, 263, doi: 10.1016/0370-1573(79)90023-1 Choksi, N., Lithwick, Y., Chiang, E., & Li, R. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.05035, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.05035 Christiansen, J. L., McElroy, D. L., Harbut, M., et al. 2025, PSJ, 6, 186, doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ade3c2 Clanton, C., & Gaudi, B. S. 2014, ApJ, 791, 90, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/791/2/90 Clanton, C., & Gaudi, B. S. 2016, ApJ, 819, 125, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/819/2/125 Clarke, C. J., & Pringle, J. E. 1993, MNRAS, 261, 190, doi: 10.1093/mnras/261.1.190 Clement, M. S., Deienno, R., Kaib, N. A., et al. 2021a, Icarus, 367, 114556, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114556 Clement, M. S., Kaib, N. A., Raymond, S. N., & Walsh, K. J. 2018, Icarus, 311, 340, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2018.04.008 Clement, M. S., Raymond, S. N., Kaib, N. A., et al. 2021b, Icarus, 355, 114122, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2020.114122 Cloutier, R., Tamayo, D., & Valencia, D. 2015, ApJ, 813, 8, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/813/1/8 Coleman, G. A. L. 2024, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 530, 630, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae903 33 

Coleman, G. A. L., & DeRocco, W. 2025, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 537, 2303, doi: 10.1093/mnras/staf138 Correa-Otto, J. A., & Gil-Hutton, R. A. 2017, A&A, 608, A116, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201731229 Craig, J., & Krumholz, M. R. 2013, ApJ, 769, 150, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/769/2/150 Cresswell, P., & Nelson, R. P. 2006, A&A, 450, 833, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20054551 Cuello, N., M´ enard, F., & Price, D. J. 2023, European Physical Journal Plus, 138, 11, doi: 10.1140/epjp/s13360-022-03602-w Cuello, N., Louvet, F., Mentiplay, D., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 491, 504, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2938 ´Cuk, M. 2018, ApJ, 852, L15, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaa3db Cumming, A., Butler, R. P., Marcy, G. W., et al. 2008, PASP, 120, 531, doi: 10.1086/588487 Daffern-Powell, E. C., & Parker, R. J. 2022, MNRAS, 517, 2103, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac2797 Dai, F., Goldberg, M., Batygin, K., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 239, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad83a6 David, E.-M., Quintana, E. V., Fatuzzo, M., & Adams, F. C. 2003, PASP, 115, 825, doi: 10.1086/376395 Davies, M. B., Adams, F. C., Armitage, P., et al. 2014, in Protostars and Planets VI, ed. H. Beuther, R. S. Klessen, C. P. Dullemond, & T. Henning, 787–808, doi: 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816531240-ch034 Davies, M. B., & Sigurdsson, S. 2001, MNRAS, 324, 612, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04336.x De Furio, M., Meyer, M. R., Greene, T., et al. 2025, ApJL, 981, L34, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adb96a de la Fuente Marcos, C., & de la Fuente Marcos, R. 1999, NewA, 4, 21, doi: 10.1016/S1384-1076(98)00043-8 de Sousa, R. R., Morbidelli, A., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2020, Icarus, 339, 113605, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2019.113605 Debes, J. H., & Sigurdsson, S. 2002, The Astrophysical Journal, 572, 556, doi: 10.1086/340291 Debes, J. H., & Sigurdsson, S. 2007, ApJL, 668, L167, doi: 10.1086/523103 Deienno, R., Morbidelli, A., Gomes, R. S., & Nesvorn´ y, D. 2017, AJ, 153, 153, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa5eaa Deienno, R., Nesvorn´ y, D., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., & Yokoyama, T. 2014, AJ, 148, 25, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/148/2/25 Denneau, L., Siverd, R., Tonry, J., et al. 2025, Minor Planet Electronic Circulars, 2025-N12, doi: 10.48377/MPEC/2025-N12 Deprit, A. 1983, Celestial Mechanics, 31, 1, doi: 10.1007/BF01272557 DeRocco, W., Johnson, S. A., Zohrabi, F., Penny, M. T., & McGill, P. 2026, AJ, 172, 7, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae6e36 Diamond, J. L., & Parker, R. J. 2024, ApJ, 975, 204, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad8644 Do, A., Tucker, M. A., & Tonry, J. 2018, ApJL, 855, L10 Dobos, V., Charnoz, S., P´ al, A., Roque-Bernard, A., & Szab´ o, G. M. 2021, PASP, 133, 094401, doi: 10.1088/1538-3873/abfe04 Dong, J., Lee, E. J., Kokubo, E., Murray-Clay, R., & Gupta, A. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2603.22426, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.22426 Dong, S., Wu, Z., Ryu, Y.-H., et al. 2026a, Science, 391, 96, doi: 10.1126/science.adv9266 Dong, S., Wu, Z., Ryu, Y.-H., et al. 2026b, Science, 391, 96, doi: 10.1126/science.adv9266 Doolin, S., & Blundell, K. M. 2011, MNRAS, 418, 2656, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19657.x Doyle, L. R., Carter, J. A., Fabrycky, D. C., et al. 2011, Science, 333, 1602, doi: 10.1126/science.1210923 Drahus, M., Guzik, P., Waniak, W., et al. 2018, Nature Astronomy, 2, 407, doi: 10.1038/s41550-018-0440-1 Duchˆ ene, G., & Kraus, A. 2013, ARA&A, 51, 269, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081710-102602 Duncan, M. J., & Lissauer, J. J. 1998, Icarus, 134, 303, doi: 10.1006/icar.1998.5962 Duquennoy, A., & Mayor, M. 1991, A&A, 248, 485 Dvorak, R. 1984, Celestial Mechanics, 34, 369, doi: 10.1007/BF01235815 Dvorak, R. 1986, A&A, 167, 379 Dvorak, R., Froeschle, C., & Froeschle, C. 1989, A&A, 226, 335 Dybczy´ nski, P. A., & Kr´ olikowska, M. 2018, A&A, 610, L11, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201732309 El-Badry, K., & Rix, H.-W. 2018, MNRAS, 480, 4884, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2186 El-Badry, K., Rix, H.-W., Tian, H., Duchˆ ene, G., & Moe, M. 2019, MNRAS, 489, 5822, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz2480 Ellithorpe, E. A., & Kaib, N. A. 2022, MNRAS, 515, 2914, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac1973 Esposito, J., Li, G., & Wang, S. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2603.22409, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2603.22409 Faber, P., & Quillen, A. C. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 1823, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12490.x Fabrycky, D. C., Lissauer, J. J., Ragozzine, D., et al. 2014, ApJ, 790, 146 Fang, J., & Margot, J.-L. 2013, ApJ, 767, 115, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/767/2/115 Farago, F., & Laskar, J. 2010, MNRAS, 401, 1189, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15711.x 34 

Fellhauer, M., Lin, D. N. C., Bolte, M., Aarseth, S. J., & Williams, K. A. 2003, ApJL, 595, L53, doi: 10.1086/379005 Feng, F., & Jones, H. R. A. 2018, ApJL, 852, L27, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaa404 Fernandes, R. B., Mulders, G. D., Pascucci, I., Mordasini, C., & Emsenhuber, A. 2019, ApJ, 874, 81, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab0300 Fernandez, J. A., & Ip, W.-H. 1984, Icarus, 58, 109, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(84)90101-5 Fischer, D. A., & Valenti, J. 2005, ApJ, 622, 1102 Flammini Dotti, F., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., Berczik, P., Shu, Q., & Spurzem, R. 2025, A&A, 693, A166, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202452441 Flammini Dotti, F., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., Wu, K., et al. 2026, A&A, 706, A219, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202557334 Ford, E. B. 2014, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 111, 12616, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1304219111 Ford, E. B., & Chiang, E. I. 2007, The Astrophysical Journal, 661, 602, doi: 10.1086/513598 Ford, E. B., Lystad, V., & Rasio, F. A. 2005, Nature, 434, 873, doi: 10.1038/nature03427 Ford, E. B., & Rasio, F. A. 2008, ApJ, 686, 621, doi: 10.1086/590926 Forgan, D., Parker, R. J., & Rice, K. 2015, MNRAS, 447, 836, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu2504 Forgan, D., & Rice, K. 2009, MNRAS, 400, 2022, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15596.x Forgan, D. H., Hall, C., Meru, F., & Rice, W. K. M. 2018, MNRAS, 474, 5036, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stx2870 Fragner, M. M., & Nelson, R. P. 2009, A&A, 505, 873, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200912292 Froeschl´ e, C., Gonczi, R., & Lega, E. 1997, Planet. Space Sci., 45, 881, doi: 10.1016/S0032-0633(97)00058-5 Fujii, M. S., & Hori, Y. 2019, Astronomy & Astrophysics, 624, A110, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834677 Fulton, B. J., Rosenthal, L. J., Hirsch, L. A., et al. 2021, ApJS, 255, 14 Funk, B., Wuchterl, G., Schwarz, R., Pilat-Lohinger, E., & Eggl, S. 2010, A&A, 516, A82, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/200912698 Gagn´ e, J., Faherty, J. K., Mamajek, E. E., et al. 2017, ApJS, 228, 18, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/228/2/18 Gavino, S., & Lissauer, J. J. 2026, A&A, 710, A119, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202557642 Ge, J., Zhang, H., Zang, W., et al. 2022, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2206.06693, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2206.06693 Gennaro, M., & Robberto, M. 2020, ApJ, 896, 80, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab911a Georgakarakos, N., Eggl, S., Ali-Dib, M., & Dobbs-Dixon, I. 2024, AJ, 168, 224, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad7a78 Gilliland, R. L., Brown, T. M., Guhathakurta, P., et al. 2000, ApJL, 545, L47, doi: 10.1086/317334 Ginsburg, A., Sip˝ ocz, B. M., Brasseur, C., et al. 2019, AJ, 157, 98 Gladman, B. 1993, Icarus, 106, 247, doi: 10.1006/icar.1993.1169 Gladman, B., Holman, M., Grav, T., et al. 2002, Icarus, 157, 269, doi: 10.1006/icar.2002.6860 Goldreich, P., Lithwick, Y., & Sari, R. 2004a, ARA&A, 42, 549, doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.42.053102.134004 Goldreich, P., Lithwick, Y., & Sari, R. 2004b, ApJ, 614, 497, doi: 10.1086/423612 Gomes, R., Levison, H. F., Tsiganis, K., & Morbidelli, A. 2005, Nature, 435, 466, doi: 10.1038/nature03676 Gong, Y.-X., Zhou, J.-L., Xie, J.-W., & Wu, X.-M. 2013, ApJL, 769, L14, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/769/1/L14 Gould, A., Jung, Y. K., Hwang, K.-H., et al. 2022, Journal of Korean Astronomical Society, 55, 173, doi: 10.5303/JKAS.2022.55.5.173 Grishin, E., Winter, J., & Alvarado-Montes, J. A. 2025, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2512.13773, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.13773 Griveaud, P., Crida, A., Petit, A. C., Lega, E., & Morbidelli, A. 2024, A&A, 688, A202, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202450340 Grunblatt, S. K., Saunders, N., Sun, M., et al. 2022, AJ, 163, 120, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac4972 Guo, K., Ida, S., & Ogihara, M. 2025, Formation of Free-Floating Planets via Ejection: Population Synthesis with a Realistic IMF and Comparison to Microlensing Observations, arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2511.03246 Guo, Y., Zhang, L., Feng, F., et al. 2025, AJ, 170, 362, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae1833 Guzik, P., Drahus, M., Rusek, K., et al. 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4, 53 Hadden, S., & Wu, Y. 2025, Free Floating or Merely Detached? arXiv, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2507.08968 Hadjidemetriou, J. D. 1963, Icarus, 2, 440, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(63)90072-1 Hamers, A. S., & Tremaine, S. 2017, AJ, 154, 272, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa9926 Hands, T. O., Dehnen, W., Gration, A., Stadel, J., & Moore, B. 2019, MNRAS, 490, 21, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1069 Hao, W., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., & Spurzem, R. 2013, MNRAS, 433, 867, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt771 35 

Harris, C. R., Millman, K. J., van der Walt, S. J., et al. 2020, Nature, 585, 357 Hearnshaw, J. B., Abe, F., Bond, I. A., et al. 2006, in The 9th Asian-Pacific Regional IAU Meeting, ed. W. Sutantyo, P. W. Premadi, P. Mahasena, T. Hidayat, & S. Mineshige, 272, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0509420 Heggie, D. C. 1975, MNRAS, 173, 729, doi: 10.1093/mnras/173.3.729 Heggie, D. C. 2006, in Few-Body Problem: Theory and Computer Simulations, 20, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.astro-ph/0512504 Heggie, D. C., & Rasio, F. A. 1996, MNRAS, 282, 1064, doi: 10.1093/mnras/282.3.1064 Henderson, C. B., Gaudi, B. S., Han, C., et al. 2014, ApJ, 794, 52, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/794/1/52 H´ enon, M., & Guyot, M. 1970, in Periodic Orbits Stability and Resonances, ed. G. E. O. Giacaglia, 349 Hill, G. W. 1886 Acta Mathematica, 8, 1 Hills, J. G. 1983, ApJ, 267, 322, doi: 10.1086/160871 Hills, J. G. 1984, AJ, 89, 1559, doi: 10.1086/113659 Hills, J. G., & Dissly, R. W. 1989, AJ, 98, 1069, doi: 10.1086/115197 Holman, M. J., & Wiegert, P. A. 1999, AJ, 117, 621, doi: 10.1086/300695 Hong, Y.-C., Raymond, S. N., Nicholson, P. D., & Lunine, J. I. 2018, The Astrophysical Journal, 852, 85, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aaa0db Huang, X., & Lai, D. 2026, ApJ, 998, 245, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae394f Hunter, J. D. 2007, Computing in science & engineering, 9, 90 Hurley, J. R., & Shara, M. M. 2002, ApJ, 565, 1251, doi: 10.1086/337921 Hwang, H.-C., Ting, Y.-S., & Zakamska, N. L. 2022, MNRAS, 512, 3383, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac675 Hwang, H.-C., & Zakamska, N. L. 2025, ApJ, 991, 226, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adfa1c Ida, S., Tanaka, H., Johansen, A., Kanagawa, K. D., & Tanigawa, T. 2018, ApJ, 864, 77, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aad69c Inyanya, T., Jung, Y. K., Yang, H., et al. 2026, KMT-2024-BLG-3237: Another Free-Floating Planet Candidate with Angular Einstein Radius Measurement, https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.22709 Izidoro, A., Bitsch, B., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2021, A&A, 650, A152, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201935336 Izidoro, A., Morbidelli, A., Raymond, S. N., Hersant, F., & Pierens, A. 2015, A&A, 582, A99, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201425525 Izidoro, A., Ogihara, M., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2017, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 470, 1750 Izidoro, A., Raymond, S. N., Kaib, N. A., Morbidelli, A., & Isella, A. 2025, Nature Astronomy, 9, 982, doi: 10.1038/s41550-025-02556-0 Jackson, A. P., Tamayo, D., Hammond, N., Ali-Dib, M., & Rein, H. 2018, MNRAS: Letters, 478, L49 Jakub´ ık, M., Morbidelli, A., Nesluˇ san, L., & Brasser, R. 2012, A&A, 540, A71, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201117687 Janson, M., Gratton, R., Rodet, L., et al. 2021, Nature, 600, 231, doi: 10.1038/s41586-021-04124-8 Jewitt, D., Hui, M.-T., Kim, Y., et al. 2020, ApJL, 888, L23, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab621b Jewitt, D., Hui, M.-T., Mutchler, M., Kim, Y., & Agarwal, J. 2025, ApJL, 990, L2, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adf8d8 Jewitt, D., & Luu, J. 2019, ApJL, 886, L29, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab530b Jewitt, D., Luu, J., Rajagopal, J., et al. 2017, arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05687 Jewitt, D., & Seligman, D. Z. 2023, ARA&A, 61, 197, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-071221-054221 Jiang, Y.-F., & Tremaine, S. 2010, MNRAS, 401, 977, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2009.15744.x Johnson, S. A., Penny, M., Gaudi, B. S., et al. 2020, AJ, 160, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aba75b Jung, Y. K., Hwang, K.-H., Yang, H., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 152, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad6b12 Juri´ c, M., & Tremaine, S. 2008, ApJ, 686, 603, doi: 10.1086/590047 Kaib, N. A., Parsells, A., Grimm, S., Quarles, B., & Clement, M. S. 2024, Icarus, 415, 116057, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2024.116057 Kaib, N. A., & Raymond, S. N. 2025, Icarus, 439, 116632, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2025.116632 Kaib, N. A., Raymond, S. N., & Duncan, M. 2013, Nature, 493, 381, doi: 10.1038/nature11780 Kapusta, M., Mr´ oz, P., Ryu, Y.-H., et al. 2026, A&A, 706, A110, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202555863 Kim, D.-J., Kim, H.-W., Hwang, K.-H., et al. 2018, AJ, 155, 76, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaa47b Kim, H.-W., Hwang, K.-H., Gould, A., et al. 2021, The Astronomical Journal, 162, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abfc4a Knight, M. M., Protopapa, S., Kelley, M. S., et al. 2017, ApJL, 851, L31 Kokubo, E., & Ida, S. 1998, Icarus, 131, 171, doi: 10.1006/icar.1997.5840 Koshimoto, N., Sumi, T., Bennett, D. P., et al. 2023, AJ, 166, 107, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ace689 36 

Kratter, K. M., & Perets, H. B. 2012, The Astrophysical Journal, 753, 91, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/753/1/91 Kremer, K., D’Orazio, D. J., Samsing, J., Chatterjee, S., & Rasio, F. A. 2019, The Astrophysical Journal, 885, 2, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab44d1 Kroupa, P. 2001, MNRAS, 322, 231, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04022.x Kroupa, P., Tout, C. A., & Gilmore, G. 1993, MNRAS, 262, 545, doi: 10.1093/mnras/262.3.545 Lada, C. J., & Lada, E. A. 2003, ARA&A, 41, 57, doi: 10.1146/annurev.astro.41.011802.094844 Lam, C., & Kipping, D. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 5692, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty022 Langeveld, A. B., Scholz, A., Muˇ zi´ c, K., et al. 2024, AJ, 168, 179, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad6f0c Laplace, P.-S. 1878, Œuvres compl` etes de Laplace, Vol. 1 (Paris: Gauthier-Villars) Laskar, J. 1997, A&A, 317, L75 Laskar, J. 2000, PhRvL, 84, 3240, doi: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.84.3240 Laskar, J., & Petit, A. C. 2017, A&A, 605, A72, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201630022 Lastovka, M., Gaudi, B. S., Johnson, S. A., et al. 2025, AJ, 170, 258, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ae0196 Laughlin, G., & Adams, F. C. 1998, The Astrophysical Journal, 508, L171, doi: 10.1086/311736 Laughlin, G., & Adams, F. C. 2000, Icarus, 145, 614, doi: 10.1006/icar.2000.6355 Laughlin, G., & Batygin, K. 2017, Research Notes of the AAS, 1, 43 Lee, E. J., DeRocco, W., Hadden, S., & Gaudi, B. S. 2026, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 1005, L18, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ae796f Lee, M. H., & Peale, S. J. 2002, ApJ, 567, 596 Levison, H. F., Dones, L., Chapman, C. R., et al. 2001, Icarus, 151, 286, doi: 10.1006/icar.2001.6608 Levison, H. F., Morbidelli, A., Tsiganis, K., Nesvorn´ y, D., & Gomes, R. 2011, AJ, 142, 152, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/142/5/152 Li, D., Mustill, A. J., & Davies, M. B. 2019, MNRAS, 488, 1366, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz1794 Li, G., & Adams, F. C. 2015, MNRAS, 448, 344, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv012 Li, G., Holman, M. J., & Tao, M. 2016, ApJ, 831, 96, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/831/1/96 Li, J., Lai, D., & Rodet, L. 2022, ApJ, 934, 154, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ac7c0d Li, L.-S. 2008, Astronomy Reports, 52, 806, doi: 10.1134/S106377290810003X Lin, D. N. C., & Ida, S. 1997, ApJ, 477, 781, doi: 10.1086/303738 Lissauer, J. J., & Gavino, S. 2021, Icarus, 364, 114470, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114470 Lissauer, J. J., Ragozzine, D., Fabrycky, D. C., et al. 2011, ApJS, 197, 8 Lithwick, Y., & Wu, Y. 2011, ApJ, 739, 31 Lithwick, Y., & Wu, Y. 2014, Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 111, 12610, doi: 10.1073/pnas.1308261110 Liu, B., Raymond, S. N., & Jacobson, S. A. 2022, Nature, 604, 643, doi: 10.1038/s41586-022-04535-1 LoRusso, R., Petrovich, C., & Gautham Bhaskar, H. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.08383, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.08383 Lovis, C., S´ egransan, D., Mayor, M., et al. 2011, A&A, 528, A112, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201015577 Lu, T., Millholland, S. C., Rice, M., et al. 2026, arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.30177. https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.30177 Lucas, P. W., & Roche, P. F. 2000, MNRAS, 314, 858, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2000.03515.x Luhman, K. L. 2004, ApJ, 617, 1216, doi: 10.1086/425647 Luhman, K. L. 2012, ARA&A, 50, 65, doi: 10.1146/annurev-astro-081811-125528 Luhman, K. L., Alves de Oliveira, C., Baraffe, I., et al. 2024, AJ, 167, 19, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad00b7 Luhman, K. L., Burgasser, A. J., & Bochanski, J. J. 2011, ApJL, 730, L9, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/730/1/L9 Luhman, K. L., Esplin, T. L., & Loutrel, N. P. 2016, ApJ, 827, 52, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/827/1/52 Ma, S., Mao, S., Ida, S., Zhu, W., & Lin, D. N. C. 2016, MNRAS, 461, L107, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slw110 Malavolta, L., Nascimbeni, V., Piotto, G., et al. 2016, A&A, 588, A118, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201527933 Maldonado, R. F., Villaver, E., Mustill, A. J., & Ch´ avez, M. 2022, MNRAS, 512, 104, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac481 Malhotra, R. 1993, Nature, 365, 819, doi: 10.1038/365819a0 Malhotra, R. 1995, AJ, 110, 420, doi: 10.1086/117532 Malhotra, R. 1998, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 149, Solar System Formation and Evolution, ed. D. Lazzaro, R. Vieira Martins, S. Ferraz-Mello, & J. Fernandez, 37 Malmberg, D., Davies, M. B., & Chambers, J. E. 2007, MNRAS, 377, L1, doi: 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2007.00291.x Malmberg, D., Davies, M. B., & Heggie, D. C. 2011, MNRAS, 411, 859, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2010.17730.x Mann, A. W., Gaidos, E., Mace, G. N., et al. 2016, ApJ, 818, 46, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/1/46 37 

Martin, D. V., Triaud, A. H. M. J., Udry, S., et al. 2019, A&A, 624, A68, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201833669 Martin, R. G., Lubow, S. H., Vallet, D., Anugu, N., & Gies, D. R. 2023, ApJL, 957, L28, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ad0730 Marzari, F. 2014, MNRAS, 444, 1419, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu1544 Marzari, F. 2025, MNRAS, 536, 422, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae2602 Marzari, F., & Picogna, G. 2013, A&A, 550, A64, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201220436 Marzari, F., & Weidenschilling, S. J. 2002, Icarus, 156, 570, doi: 10.1006/icar.2001.6786 Marzari, F., Weidenschilling, S. J., Barbieri, M., & Granata, V. 2005, ApJ, 618, 502, doi: 10.1086/425976 Masuda, K., & Winn, J. N. 2017, AJ, 153, 187, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aa647c Mayor, M., Marmier, M., Lovis, C., et al. 2011, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1109.2497, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1109.2497 McKinney, W. 2010, in Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, Vol. 445, Austin, TX, 51–56 Meech, K. J., Weryk, R., Micheli, M., et al. 2017, Nature, 552, 378 Meibom, S., Torres, G., Fressin, F., et al. 2013, Nature, 499, 55, doi: 10.1038/nature12279 Miret-Roig, N., Bouy, H., Raymond, S. N., et al. 2022, Nature Astronomy, 6, 89, doi: 10.1038/s41550-021-01513-x Moe, M., & Di Stefano, R. 2017, ApJS, 230, 15, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aa6fb6 Morbidelli, A. 2018, in Handbook of Exoplanets, ed. H. J. Deeg & J. A. Belmonte, 145, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-55333-7 145 Morbidelli, A., Batygin, K., Brasser, R., & Raymond, S. N. 2020, MNRAS, 497, L46, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slaa111 Morbidelli, A., Levison, H. F., Tsiganis, K., & Gomes, R. 2005, Nature, 435, 462 Morrison, S. J., & Kratter, K. M. 2016, ApJ, 823, 118, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/823/2/118 Mr´ oz, P., Ban, M., Marty, P., & Poleski, R. 2024, AJ, 167, 40, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad1106 Mr´ oz, P., Udalski, A., Skowron, J., et al. 2017, Nature, 548, 183, doi: 10.1038/nature23276 Mr´ oz, P., Udalski, A., Skowron, J., et al. 2017, Nature, 548, 183, doi: 10.1038/nature23276 Mr´ oz, P., Udalski, A., Bennett, D. P., et al. 2019, A&A, 622, A201, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834557 Mr´ o z, P., Poleski, R., Han, C., et al. 2020, The Astronomical Journal, 159, 262, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab8aeb Mr´ oz, P., Ryu, Y.-H., Skowron, J., et al. 2018, The Astronomical Journal, 155, 121, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aaaae9 Mr´ oz, P., Poleski, R., Gould, A., et al. 2020, The Astrophysical Journal Letters, 903, L11, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/abbfad Mudryk, L. R., & Wu, Y. 2006, The Astrophysical Journal, 639, 423, doi: 10.1086/499347 Mustill, A. J., Veras, D., & Villaver, E. 2014, MNRAS, 437, 1404, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1973 Muˇ zi´ c, K., Scholz, A., Geers, V., Jayawardhana, R., & Tamura, M. 2012, ApJ, 744, 134, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/744/2/134 Nagasawa, M., Ida, S., & Bessho, T. 2008, ApJ, 678, 498, doi: 10.1086/529369 Nascimbeni, V., Bedin, L. R., Piotto, G., De Marchi, F., & Rich, R. M. 2012, A&A, 541, A144, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201118655 Nayakshin, S., Zhang, L., ´Calovi´ c, A., et al. 2026, MNRAS, 546, stag043, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag043 Nesvorn´ y, D. 2015a, AJ, 150, 73, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/3/73 Nesvorn´ y, D. 2015b, AJ, 150, 68, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/150/3/68 Nesvorn´ y, D., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., & Deienno, R. 2014a, ApJ, 784, 22, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/784/1/22 Nesvorn´ y, D., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., Deienno, R., & Walsh, K. J. 2014b, AJ, 148, 52, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/148/3/52 Nesvorn´ y, D., Vokrouhlick´ y, D., & Morbidelli, A. 2013, ApJ, 768, 45, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/768/1/45 Nesvorn´ y, D. 2011, The Astrophysical Journal, 742, L22, doi: 10.1088/2041-8205/742/2/L22 Nesvorn´ y, D., & Morbidelli, A. 2012, The Astronomical Journal, 144, 117, doi: 10.1088/0004-6256/144/4/117 Nielsen, E. L., De Rosa, R. J., Macintosh, B., et al. 2019, AJ, 158, 13 Nigioni, A., Turrini, D., Danielski, C., Polychroni, D., & Chambers, J. E. 2026, A&A, 706, A96, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202452890 Nordstr¨ om, B., Mayor, M., Andersen, J., et al. 2004, A&A, 418, 989, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20035959 Oasa, Y., Tamura, M., & Sugitani, K. 1999, ApJ, 526, 336, doi: 10.1086/307964 Obertas, A., Van Laerhoven, C., & Tamayo, D. 2017, Icarus, 293, 52, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2017.04.010 O’Brien, M. W., Tremblay, P.-E., Klein, B. L., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 527, 8687, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3773 O’Connor, C. E. 2026, ApJ, 998, 280, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ae3b26 38 

Offner, S. S. R., Moe, M., Kratter, K. M., et al. 2023, in Astronomical Society of the Pacific Conference Series, Vol. 534, Protostars and Planets VII, ed. S. Inutsuka, Y. Aikawa, T. Muto, K. Tomida, & M. Tamura, 275, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2203.10066 Ogihara, M., & Ida, S. 2009, ApJ, 699, 824, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/699/1/824 Oliphant, T. E. 2006, A guide to NumPy, Vol. 1 (Trelgol Publishing USA) Omarov, T. B. 1962, Akademiia Nauk Kazakhskoi SSR, Izvestiia, Seriia Fiziko-Matematicheskaia, 14, 66 ’Oumuamua ISSI Team, Bannister, M. T., Bhandare, A., et al. 2019, Nature Astronomy, 3, 594, doi: 10.1038/s41550-019-0816-x Outland, B., Noble, G., Smith, A. W., & Lissauer, J. J. 2026, Icarus, 452, 117025, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2026.117025 Papaloizou, J. C., Nelson, R. P., & Masset, F. 2001, A&A, 366, 263 Papaloizou, J. C. B., & Terquem, C. 2006, Reports on Progress in Physics, 69, 119, doi: 10.1088/0034-4885/69/1/R03 Parker, R. J., Alcock, H. L., Nicholson, R. B., Pani´ c, O., & Goodwin, S. P. 2021, ApJ, 913, 95, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/abf4cc Parker, R. J., & Quanz, S. P. 2012, MNRAS, 419, 2448, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19911.x Parker, R. J., & Veras, D. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2607.00080. https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.00080 Peale, S. J. 1976, ARA&A, 14, 215, doi: 10.1146/annurev.aa.14.090176.001243 Pearson, S. G., & McCaughrean, M. J. 2023, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2310.01231, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2310.01231 Pendleton, Y. J., & Black, D. C. 1983, AJ, 88, 1415, doi: 10.1086/113430 Penny, M. T., Gaudi, B. S., Kerins, E., et al. 2019, ApJS, 241, 3, doi: 10.3847/1538-4365/aafb69 Petit, A. C., Pichierri, G., Davies, M. B., & Johansen, A. 2020, A&A, 641, A176, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038764 Pfalzner, S., Aizpuru Vargas, L. L., Bhandare, A., & Veras, D. 2021, A&A, 651, A38, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202140587 Picogna, G., & Marzari, F. 2014, A&A, 564, A28, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201322816 Pilat-Lohinger, E., Funk, B., & Dvorak, R. 2003, A&A, 400, 1085, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20021811 Pilat-Lohinger, E., Funk, B., Freistetter, F., & Dvorak, R. 2002, in ESA Special Publication, Vol. 518, Exo-Astrobiology, ed. H. Lacoste, 547–548 Poleski, R., Skowron, J., Mr´ oz, P., et al. 2021, AcA, 71, 1, doi: 10.32023/0001-5237/71.1.1 Poleski, R., Ryu, Y.-H., Udalski, A., et al. 2025, AcA, 75, 279, doi: 10.32023/0001-5237/75.4.1 Portegies Zwart, S. 2021, A&A, 647, A136, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202038888 Portegies Zwart, S., Torres, S., Pelupessy, I., B´ edorf, J., & Cai, M. X. 2018, MNRAS, 479, L17, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/sly088 Price-Whelan, A. M., Sip˝ ocz, B. M., G¨ unther, H. M., et al. 2018, AJ, 156, 123, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabc4f Proszkow, E.-M., & Adams, F. C. 2009, ApJS, 185, 486, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/185/2/486 Pu, B., & Lai, D. 2021, MNRAS, 508, 597, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2504 Pu, B., & Wu, Y. 2015, ApJ, 807, 44, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/807/1/44 Quarles, B., Li, G., Kostov, V., & Haghighipour, N. 2020, AJ, 159, 80, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ab64fa Quarles, B., & Lissauer, J. J. 2016, AJ, 151, 111, doi: 10.3847/0004-6256/151/5/111 Quarles, B., Satyal, S., Kostov, V., Kaib, N., & Haghighipour, N. 2018, ApJ, 856, 150, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aab264 Quillen, A. C. 2011, MNRAS, 418, 1043, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2011.19555.x Rabago, I., & Steffen, J. H. 2019, MNRAS, 489, 2323, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2552 Rabl, G., & Dvorak, R. 1988, A&A, 191, 385 Raghavan, D., McAlister, H. A., Henry, T. J., et al. 2010, ApJS, 190, 1, doi: 10.1088/0067-0049/190/1/1 Rasio, F. A., & Ford, E. B. 1996, Science, 274, 954 Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., & Gorelick, N. 2009, ApJL, 699, L88, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/699/2/L88 Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., & Gorelick, N. 2010, ApJ, 711, 772 Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., & Veras, D. 2018, ApJL, 856, L7 Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., Veras, D., Quintana, E. V., & Barclay, T. 2018, MNRAS, 476, 3031, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty468 Raymond, S. N., Barnes, R., & Mandell, A. M. 2008, MNRAS, 384, 663, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12712.x Raymond, S. N., Izidoro, A., & Kaib, N. A. 2023, MNRAS, 524, L72, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slad079 Raymond, S. N., Izidoro, A., & Morbidelli, A. 2020, in Planetary Astrobiology, ed. V. S. Meadows, G. N. Arney, B. E. Schmidt, & D. J. Des Marais, 287, doi: 10.2458/azu uapress 9780816540068 39 

Raymond, S. N., & Kaib, N. A. 2026, Icarus, 447, 116910, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2025.116910 Raymond, S. N., Kaib, N. A., Selsis, F., & Bouy, H. 2024, MNRAS, 527, 6126, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad3604 Raymond, S. N., Quinn, T., & Lunine, J. I. 2005, ApJ, 632, 670, doi: 10.1086/433179 Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., Moro-Mart´ ın, A., et al. 2011, A&A, 530, A62, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201116456 Raymond, S. N., Armitage, P. J., Moro-Mart´ ın, A., et al. 2012, A&A, 541, A11, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201117049 Reg´ aly, Z., Fr¨ ohlich, V., & Vink´ o, J. 2022, The Astrophysical Journal, 941, 121, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/aca1ba Rice, D. R., Rasio, F. A., & Steffen, J. H. 2018, MNRAS, 481, 2205, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty2418 Rice, D. R., & Steffen, J. H. 2023, MNRAS, 520, 4057, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stad393 Rice, M., & Laughlin, G. 2019, ApJL, 884, L22 Rice, M., Wang, S., & Laughlin, G. 2022, ApJL, 926, L17 Rickman, H., Wajer, P., Przyluski, R., et al. 2023, MNRAS, 520, 637, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stac3705 Robberto, M., Gennaro, M., Ubeira Gabellini, M. G., et al. 2020, ApJ, 896, 79, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab911e Rosotti, G. P., Dale, J. E., de Juan Ovelar, M., et al. 2014, MNRAS, 441, 2094, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stu679 Roy, A., & Haddow, M. 2003, Celestial Mechanics and Dynamical Astronomy, 87, 411, doi: 10.1023/B:CELE.0000006767.34371.2f Roy, A. E., & Ovenden, M. W. 1954, MNRAS, 114, 232, doi: 10.1093/mnras/114.2.232 Rusznak, J., Wang, X.-Y., Rice, M., & Wang, S. 2025, ApJL, 983, L42, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adc129 Ryu, Y.-H., Mr´ oz, P., Gould, A., et al. 2021, AJ, 161, 126, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abd55f Ryu, Y.-H., Gould, A., Hwang, K.-H., et al. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2606.27725. https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.27725 Safronov, V. S., & Zvjagina, E. V. 1969, Icarus, 10, 109, doi: 10.1016/0019-1035(69)90013-X Scally, A., & Clarke, C. 2001, MNRAS, 325, 449, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04274.x Scharf, C., & Menou, K. 2009, ApJL, 693, L113, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/693/2/L113 Schib, O., Mordasini, C., Emsenhuber, A., & Helled, R. 2025a, A&A, 704, A27, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202556262 Schib, O., Mordasini, C., Emsenhuber, A., & Helled, R. 2025b, A&A, 704, A28, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202556261 Scholz, A., Geers, V., Jayawardhana, R., et al. 2009, ApJ, 702, 805, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/702/1/805 Seligman, D. Z., Micheli, M., Farnocchia, D., et al. 2025, ApJL, 989, L36, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/adf49a Sigurdsson, S. 1992, ApJL, 399, L95, doi: 10.1086/186615 Sigurdsson, S., Richer, H. B., Hansen, B. M., Stairs, I. H., & Thorsett, S. E. 2003, Science, 301, 193, doi: 10.1126/science.1086326 Silsbee, K., & Tremaine, S. 2018, AJ, 155, 75 Smallwood, J. L., Nealon, R., Chen, C., et al. 2021, MNRAS, 508, 392, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stab2624 Smith, A. W., & Lissauer, J. J. 2009, Icarus, 201, 381, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2008.12.027 Smith, K. W., & Bonnell, I. A. 2001, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 322, L1, doi: 10.1046/j.1365-8711.2001.04321.x Smullen, R. A., Kratter, K. M., & Shannon, A. 2016, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 461, 1288, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw1347 Spergel, D., Gehrels, N., Baltay, C., et al. 2015, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:1503.03757, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1503.03757 Spurzem, R., Giersz, M., Heggie, D. C., & Lin, D. N. C. 2009, The Astrophysical Journal, 697, 458, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/697/1/458 Stephan, A. P., & Stassun, K. G. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2607.02653. https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.02653 St¨ orzer, H., & Hollenbach, D. 1999, ApJ, 515, 669, doi: 10.1086/307055 Sucerquia, M., Ram´ ırez, V., Alvarado-Montes, J. A., & Zuluaga, J. I. 2020, MNRAS, 492, 3499, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3548 Sumi, T., Kamiya, K., Bennett, D. P., et al. 2011, Nature, 473, 349, doi: 10.1038/nature10092 Sumi, T., Koshimoto, N., Bennett, D. P., et al. 2023, AJ, 166, 108, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ace688 Sutherland, A. P., & Fabrycky, D. C. 2016, The Astrophysical Journal, 818, 6, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/818/1/6 Suzuki, D., Bennett, D. P., Sumi, T., et al. 2016, ApJ, 833, 145, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/833/2/145 Szebehely, V. 1977, Celestial Mechanics, 15, 107, doi: 10.1007/BF01229051 Szebehely, V. 1980, Celestial Mechanics, 22, 7, doi: 10.1007/BF01228750 Szebehely, V., & McKenzie, R. 1981, Celestial Mechanics, 23, 3, doi: 10.1007/BF01228541 Tamayo, D., Murray, N., Tremaine, S., & Winn, J. 2021, AJ, 162, 220, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ac1c6a 40 

Tamayo, D., Triaud, A. H. M. J., Menou, K., & Rein, H. 2015, ApJ, 805, 100, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/805/2/100 Teasdale, M., & Stamatellos, D. 2026, arXiv e-prints, arXiv:2604.24420, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2604.24420 Terquem, C., & Papaloizou, J. C. 2007, ApJ, 654, 1110 Thommes, E. W., Duncan, M. J., & Levison, H. F. 1999, Nature, 402, 635, doi: 10.1038/45185 Thommes, E. W., Duncan, M. J., & Levison, H. F. 2002, AJ, 123, 2862, doi: 10.1086/339975 Thornton, M., Montet, B. T., White, R., Shao, A., & Kumar, D. T. 2026, MNRAS, 548, stag515, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stag515 Thorsett, S. E., Arzoumanian, Z., & Taylor, J. H. 1993, ApJL, 412, L33, doi: 10.1086/186933 Tobin, J. J., Sheehan, P. D., Megeath, S. T., et al. 2020, ApJ, 890, 130, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ab6f64 Tokadjian, A., & Piro, A. L. 2020, AJ, 160, 194, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abb29e Tsiganis, K., Gomes, R., Morbidelli, A., & Levison, H. 2005, Nature, 435, 459 Udalski, A., Szyma´ nski, M. K., & Szyma´ nski, G. 2015, AcA, 65, 1, doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1504.05966 Valencia, D., O’Connell, R. J., & Sasselov, D. 2006, Icarus, 181, 545, doi: 10.1016/j.icarus.2005.11.021 van Elteren, A., Portegies Zwart, S., Pelupessy, I., Cai, M. X., & McMillan, S. L. W. 2019, A&A, 624, A120, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201834641 Veras, D. 2016, Royal Society Open Science, 3, 150571, doi: 10.1098/rsos.150571 Veras, D., & Armitage, P. J. 2005, ApJL, 620, L111, doi: 10.1086/428831 Veras, D., Crepp, J. R., & Ford, E. B. 2009, ApJ, 696, 1600, doi: 10.1088/0004-637X/696/2/1600 Veras, D., Evans, N. W., Wyatt, M. C., & Tout, C. A. 2014, MNRAS, 437, 1127, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1905 Veras, D., Georgakarakos, N., Dobbs-Dixon, I., & G¨ ansicke, B. T. 2017, MNRAS, 465, 2053, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2699 Veras, D., Hadjidemetriou, J. D., & Tout, C. A. 2013, MNRAS, 435, 2416, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt1451 Veras, D., & Mustill, A. J. 2013, MNRAS, 434, L11, doi: 10.1093/mnrasl/slt067 Veras, D., & Raymond, S. N. 2012, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society: Letters, 421, L117, doi: 10.1111/j.1745-3933.2012.01218.x Veras, D., & Tout, C. A. 2012, Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 422, 1648, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2012.20741.x Veras, D., Wyatt, M. C., Mustill, A. J., Bonsor, A., & Eldridge, J. J. 2011, MNRAS, 417, 2104 Verrier, P. E., & Evans, N. W. 2007, MNRAS, 382, 1432, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2966.2007.12493.x Vincke, K., & Pfalzner, S. 2016, ApJ, 828, 48, doi: 10.3847/0004-637X/828/1/48 Virtanen, P., Gommers, R., Oliphant, T. E., et al. 2020, Nature Methods, 17, 261 Vleeschower, L., Corongiu, A., Stappers, B. W., et al. 2024, MNRAS, 530, 1436, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stae816 Volk, K., & Malhotra, R. 2024, AJ, 167, 271, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad3de5 Voyatzis, G., Hadjidemetriou, J. D., Veras, D., & Varvoglis, H. 2013, MNRAS, 430, 3383, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stt137 Walt, S. v. d., Colbert, S. C., & Varoquaux, G. 2011, Computing in Science & Engineering, 13, 22 Wang, L., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., Zheng, X., Church, R. P., & Davies, M. B. 2015, MNRAS, 449, 3543, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv542 Wang, Y., Perna, R., & Zhu, Z. 2024, Nature Astronomy, 8, 756, doi: 10.1038/s41550-024-02239-2 Weidenschilling, S. J. 1975, AJ, 80, 145, doi: 10.1086/111727 Weidenschilling, S. J. 1977, Ap&SS, 51, 153, doi: 10.1007/BF00642464 Weidenschilling, S. J., & Marzari, F. 1996, Nature, 384, 619, doi: 10.1038/384619a0 Whitworth, A. P., & Zinnecker, H. 2004, A&A, 427, 299, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361:20041131 Williams, G. V., Sato, H., Sarneczky, K., et al. 2017, Central Bureau Electronic Telegrams, 4450, 1 Winter, A. J., Clarke, C. J., Rosotti, G., et al. 2018, MNRAS, 478, 2700, doi: 10.1093/mnras/sty984 Winter, A. J., & Haworth, T. J. 2022, European Physical Journal Plus, 137, 1132, doi: 10.1140/epjp/s13360-022-03314-1 Witt, H. J., & Mao, S. 1994, ApJ, 430, 505, doi: 10.1086/174426 Wittenmyer, R. A., Wang, S., Horner, J., et al. 2020, MNRAS, 492, 377, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stz3436 Wu, D.-H., Jin, S., & Steffen, J. H. 2025, AJ, 169, 28, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/ad9388 Wu, Y., & Lithwick, Y. 2011, ApJ, 735, 109 Wyatt, M. C., Bonsor, A., Jackson, A. P., Marino, S., & Shannon, A. 2017, MNRAS, 464, 3385, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stw2633 Yalinewich, A., & Petrovich, C. 2020, ApJL, 892, L11, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/ab75dc Yee, J. C., & Kenyon, S. J. 2025, AJ, 170, 132, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/adeb84 Yu, F., & Lai, D. 2024, ApJ, 970, 97, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad4f81 41 

Yuan, L., & Lee, M. H. 2024, ApJ, 967, 98, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/ad3ba4 Zakamska, N. L., & Tremaine, S. 2004, AJ, 128, 869, doi: 10.1086/422023 Zapatero Osorio, M. R., B´ ejar, V. J. S., Mart´ ın, E. L., et al. 2000, Science, 290, 103, doi: 10.1126/science.290.5489.103 Zhai, R., Lee, M. H., Gan, T., & Mao, S. 2025, ApJ, 990, 74, doi: 10.3847/1538-4357/adf557 Zhang, Q. 2018, ApJL, 852, L13, doi: 10.3847/2041-8213/aaa2f7 Zhang, S., Zhu, Z., Huang, J., et al. 2018, ApJL, 869, L47 Zhang, Y., & Lin, D. N. C. 2020, Nature Astronomy, 4, 852, doi: 10.1038/s41550-020-1065-8 Zheng, X., Kouwenhoven, M. B. N., & Wang, L. 2015, MNRAS, 453, 2759, doi: 10.1093/mnras/stv1832 Zhou, J.-L., Lin, D. N. C., & Sun, Y.-S. 2007, ApJ, 666, 423, doi: 10.1086/519918 Zink, J. K., Batygin, K., & Adams, F. C. 2020, AJ, 160, 232, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/abb8de Zuluaga, J. I., S´ anchez-Hern´ andez, O., Sucerquia, M., & Ferr´ ın, I. 2018, AJ, 155, 236, doi: 10.3847/1538-3881/aabd7c